                     Setphone Programme Notes

Programme Summary:
  This programme is intended for setting and removing such features of your
telephone exchange as:
      Call Waiting
      Call Diversion

  Call Waiting is a phone feature that uses tones sent over a line when a
call is in progress to alert the called party to the presence of another
incoming call. This is useful for voice calls, but will disrupt data if a
modem is in use.
  Call Diversion is useful for those fortunate enough to have a second
phone line, or a mobile phone, to which incoming calls can be diverted when
the primary line is needed for modem use.
  Typically, if you want to do some internet surfing, this programme can
turn off the call waiting, or divert incoming calls elsewhere.


Files Needed:
  There are five files that are relevant:

      SETPHONE.PRG
      SETPHONE.RSC
      SETPHONE.INF
      SETPHONE.HLP
      SETPHONE.TXT
    Additionally, a separate programme BUBBLEGEM can be used if
    available to show help messages.

  The programme will not run without the .RSC file. The .INF and .HLP are
not essential. The .INF contains all of the user settable parameters, and
the programme will complain if it cannot be found at start-up, but will
still run. INF can be made and saved after start-up. These programme notes
are in .TXT. The .HLP contains the text for the help bubbles produced by
BUBBLEGEM, so is not needed if BUBBLEGEM is not on your system.

Installation:
  Create a folder in a convenient location. The folder name is unimportant.
  Copy the five files into it.
    Drag SETPHONE.PRG onto the desktop. With the icon selected, go to the
    Menu bar and select "Options", Install Application" and set Default
    dir: "Application".


Brief Operation Overview:
  This brief overview of the operation assumes that all of the necessary
parameters needed by the modem and telephone exchange have been correctly
set up. That will not be the case when first run, but the detail of how to
set the parameters follows in a later section.
  Start the programme and you will be presented with the "Facility
Selection" window containing 6 radio buttons in a group labelled
"Facility". Each of these buttons is labelled with the Facility name and
action that takes place when the button is selected and activated.
  Two buttons below are labelled "Edit Facility" and "Activate". A third
button, "Quit", terminates the programme.

  "Activate" sets in train the communication with the telephone exchange to
apply the selected facility. The "Facility Selection" window closes, and
the "Activating Facility" window opens. This window shows the commands sent
to the modem and telephone exchange, the replies received, and whether the
replies match the requirements for successful application of the facility.
Upon a successful exchange of commands, the programme will (at the users
discression) either terminate, or remain in the "Activating Facility"
window.
  The "Activating Facility" window has four buttons across the bottom for
control purposes. When the window opens initially and is displaying the
data exchange sequences, the only accessable button is "Abort". This will
interrupt the dialogue with the modem or exchange. If not interrupted, the
sequence will either run to conclusion, or time out if the data exchanges
are not correct. While the data exchange is in progress, a timer window
displays the time remaining before a time-out is enforced.
  Once the data exchange has stopped, the other three buttons become
accessible. "Try Again" will re-start the data exchange sequence. "Close"
will close this window and return to the "Facility Selection" window.
"Quit" terminates the programme.

  "Edit Facility" opens the window which displays the parameters applicable
to the selected facility. In this window there are 7 frames of editable
text that are needed to describe the facility, control the modem, and set
the telephone exchange line to the required configuration. A detailed
description of how to configure these frames follows in a later section.
  Two buttons at the top of the window, "Previous" and "Next", change the
display to the next lower numbered facility, or to the next higher number,
as appropriate.
  The "Close" button closes the window and returns to the Facility
Selection window. "Clear" is useful for re-setting the data in the window.
It simply re-loads the facility data without storing any changes that may
have been made. "Keep" saves the data for the one displayed facility to
memory, but does NOT update the .INF file. "Save" takes ALL of the
parameters for all 6 facilities and writes them back to SETPHONE.INF file.

On-line Help:
  When BUBBLEGEM is running, or installed as an accessory, a brief
description of the operation of each button is available. Hold the right
mouse button until the Help bubble appears (it takes up to about half a
second). The help bubble describes the action the button will initiate.

Operation in Detail:

  Startup:
    On startup, various checks are made to ensure that all the required
    data are available.
    If SETPHONE.RSC cannot be found, an alert box is produced, and the
    programme terminates.
    The file that contains the data for each facility, "SETPHONE.INF", is
    loaded. If it cannot be found, or is corrupted, an alert box appears,
    giving the option to continue, or quit. Continuing will allow normal
    programme operation, but without any facility setting data. That data
    will need to be input (via the "Edit Facility" window) before a
    facility can be activated. If SETPHONE.INF does not load correctly, the
    alert box displays an error message of the form "Error ME123456". Each
    number or letter corresponds to a part of the file that did not load
    correctly:
        M   Modem time-out value missing
        E   Exchange handshake time-out value missing
        1 to 6  shows which facilities 1 to 6 did not load correctly.

        The modem and exchange time-out values will default to 5 seconds
        and 90 seconds respectively if they read incorrectly, or are
        missing. See the detailed description later for the .INF file.

    The programme then checks for the presence of BUBBLEGEM and for the
    SETPHONE.HLP file that BUBBLEGEM help needs. The success or otherwise
    of initialising BUBBLEGEM help is displayed in the "About" box. A tick
    against BUBBLEGEM indicates that it is operating, or a cross otherwise.
    In the event that BUBBLEGEM help is unavailable, an error number
    appears beside the cross. The numbers mean:

        -1  BUBBLEGEM itself is not available.
        -2  Additional memory for transfers to BUBBLEGEM is unavailable.
        -3  Help file SETPHONE.INF could not be found.
        -4  Error in recovering the Application Identifier of SETPHONE.PRG.

     On completion of the initialisation, the "Facility Selection" window
     will appear. On the first running of the programme, there may be no
     SETPHONE.INF file, or the data contained may not suit you, so the data
     for the required facilities must be entered. Do this by selecting
     Facility 1 (one click), then single click the "Edit Facility" button.
     The "Edit Facility" window will open.

  Editing Facility Data:

    All 7 data frames need to be completed for a facility to be applied
    correctly. For an example, the settings for the CALL WAITING facility
    will be used. The frames to be completed are:

    Facility Name:
      Enter here the name that you wish to appear on the selection radio
      button in the Selection window. It should concisely describe the
      action that the button will initiate.
      Type in - Call Waiting OFF
          Always type the name in left justified - the programme will
          centre it in the button when displayed.

    Modem Initialisation:
        Enter here the commands needed by your modem to initialise it. You
      will need to refer to the handbook for your modem for the specific
      commands. Generally you should first reset the modem to a known state
      (e.g. factory default, or your preset user profile) then apply any
      extra commands needed. Note that some exchange facilities, when they
      have been set, modify the dial tone you will subsequently receive. If
      your modem does not respond to the altered dial tone, you will have
      to set the modem to blind dial.
        It is essential that the modem be set with the commands echo
      enabled. If that is not the default, ensure that it is set.
        In my case, all I need is to reset the modem and apply the
      factory default.

      Type in - ATZ0&F0

    Dial Prefix:
        The modem needs to be told how to dial the numbers. For these
      facilities, tone dialing is required.

      Type in - ATDT

    Dial Script:
        This is the number exactly as you would press each telephone dial
      key. You can get this information for any special facilities that you
      wish to use from your telephone directory. In this case, to turn Call
      waiting OFF

      Type in - #43#

    Dial success:
        To complete this field, you need to know what replies your modem
      will send back for a successful completion of each round of
      communication. Most times an AT command is sent to the modem, some
      form of reply is returned as a result code. You can usually
      initialise the modem to send plain English results, or numerical
      codes. Plain English is best, since it allows for easy visual
      supervision of the process. You may have to set this in the Modem
      Initialisation if the default is not to your liking.
        OK is always a required success response since it is returned by
      the modem for most non-dialing commands.
        For Call Waiting OFF, the exchange will send BUSY tone at the
      completion of the facility removal. So, BUSY is a reply that
      indicates success. In this case, no other success replies are
      appropriate, but there may be others for different applications.
        The various success replies are typed into the field, separated by
      a delimiter. SETPHONE is not fussy about the delimiter - it can be
      almost anything. Use a colon, semi-colon, or comma for readability.
      However, the replies are case sensitive - type in exactly what your
      modem sends.
        When testing to see if a modem reply is one that indicates success,
      SETPHONE does a string search to see if the reply string received
      from the modem is contained within the Success field. Hence the lack
      of concern about delimiters. However, modem replies such as CONNECT
      1200 will not be found if the Success field merely contains CONNECT.

      So, for this example, type in - OK,BUSY

    Dial failure:
        In a similar way to the entries in the success field, work out what
      will be returned from the modem in the event of a failure of a
      command. In this instance, the only appropriate indicator is NO
      DIALTONE which will be sent if the modem tries to dial without first
      receiving dialtone. This could happen if the line is already in use.
        The modem may also reply ERROR if there is some error in the
      command sent.

      Type in - NO DIALTONE,ERROR

    Modem Reset:
        This field is sent to the modem on completion of a successful
        series of commands to return the modem to your preferred normal
        state. I prefer to simply reset it to the factory default.

        Type in - ATZ0&F0

      Having filled in the 7 fields, the information needs to be stored.
    Click the "KEEP" button to read the field information into memory (note
    that "KEEP" does not write to the .INF file).
      If there are other facilities that need to be entered or amended, use
    the "Previous" or "Next" buttons to display the one needed, and "Keep"
    it once you are satisified with it.
       When all amendments have been "Kept", use the "Save" button to
    simultaneously write ALL of the facilities back to the .INF file. One
    button press saves all.
      The facility operations now need to be checked, so press "Close" to
    return to the "Facility Selection" window. The facility button
    corresponding to the last facility edited will be selected, so change
    it if required.

  Facility Activation:
      This description assumes that the facility has just been set up, and
    requires testing.
      Make sure that the computer, modem, and exchange line are correctly
    connected together.
      From the Facility Selection window, select the facility required.
      Double click on the "Activate" button, and the "Activating Facility"
    window will open. At this stage the double click should be used, since
    it forces a pause of two seconds after each reply is received from the
    modem. This pause allows the reply to be read and checked for fault
    finding.
      When the window first opens, only the "Abort" button is active. Thus
    the only choice is to let the facility activation run to completion, or
    to stop it via the "Abort" button.
      The window contains, at the top, the name of the facility being
    activated (the same as is on the button in the "Selection" window).
    Below this are four fields named Command, Response, Result, and Timer.
      The Command field displays the command echoed back by the modem -
    hence the requirement for enabling command echos specified under modem
    initialisation. If no command string shows, check the modem
    connections. Did you switch the modem on?
      The Response field displays the reply received from the modem in
    response to the command. If it does not match what has been set in the
    "Success" specification, then the reply will be checked against the
    entries in the "Dial failure" specification. An message will appear in
    the "Result" window.
      A failure will cause cessation of the process. The "Abort" button
    will be de-activated, and the other 3 ("Try Again", "Close", and
    "Quit") activated to allow user intervention.
      Likewise, if the timer times out before a success response is
    received, the command will be regarded as having failed.
      If the reply from the modem matches an entry for success, the
    facility setting continues onto the next step.
      Finally, the modem is reset at the end of the sequence.
      For the example of turning off CALL WAITING, the data exchange
    sequence for a successful outcome is:

            Command to Modem    Reply from Modem  Reply from Exchange
            ATZ0&F0                OK                   None
            ATDT#43#               None                 BUSY
            ATZ0&F0                OK                   None

      If all of the commands are successful, the Result field displays a
    message to indicate that the facility has been successfully applied. At
    that point, the "Activating Facility" window will remain open if the
    double click (delay) option was used. Otherwise, the window will close,
    and the programme will terminate.

  Facility Activation Options.
      When in the Facility Selection window, there are a few variations on
    how the facility selection buttons and the "Activate" button can be
    used to run the programme.

      1. Double click a facility radio button.
          The facility will be applied immediately, and the programme will
          terminate without further user interaction upon a successful
          application. If the facility fails, the programme will remain in
          the Activating Facility window.

      2. Single click a facility button.
          This will merely select a facility on the radio buttons to
          allow the "Activate" or "Edit Facility" buttons to be used.

      3. Single click the "Activate" button when a facility is selected.
          The selected facility will be applied, and the programme will
          terminate if the facility was applied successfully.

      4. Double click the "Activate" button when a facility is selected.
          The selected facility will be applied, but there will be a pause
          after each message returned from the modem or exchange to allow
          time to read the message. This mode is intended for testing any
          new facility setup.

Other Information.

  Cookies:
    When a facility has been successfully applied, SETPHONE will place a
  "FONE" cookie in the jar if the jar is not already full. The value of the
  cookie will be between 1 and 6 to indicate which facility was applied. If
  another facility is applied when the "FONE" cookie is present, the cookie
  value will be overwritten with the new value.
    On each re-start of the programme, the cookie jar is inspected, and the
  value of any "FONE" cookie used to preset the facility selection radio
  buttons to show the last facility applied.

  .INF File:
    The .INF file is read only at startup, and is used to store the
    following:
      Modem Timeout value - between 2 and 200 seconds are allowed.
      Exchange Timeout value - between 2 and 200 seconds are allowed.

      These appear in the file as:
        MODEM_TIMER= 5
        EXCHANGE_TIMER= 90

      When reading the file, SETPHONE expects to find somewhere in the
      file, a record containing "MODEM_TIMER=" followed by the value.
      Similarly for "EXCHANGE_TIMER=" . If these records are not found,
      SETPHONE will report error M and/or error E respectively.

      Values for the 7 parameter fields for each facility in blocks of nine
      records commencing with the facility number, and finishing with an
      END indicator. Each facility appears in the file as:

        FACILITY 6
        Call Waiting OFF
        ATZ0&F0
        ATDT
        #43#
        OK;BUSY
        NO DIALTONE,ERROR
        ATZ0&F0
        END6

      When reading the file, SETPHONE will search to find a record
      contailing "FACILITY x" where x is the facility number it is
      searching for. Having found that record, it will assume that the next
      7 records are the 7 facility parameters and read them. If the eighth
      record is not "ENDx", SETPHONE will report an error in reading that
      facility.
      All six facilities are searched for sequentially.

    The .INF file is a normal ASCII text file and can be generated and
    edited with a standard text editor such as Everest. SETPHONE is fairly
    tolerant of the layout of the file, provided the notes above are not
    violated. Provided the parameters are in blocks of 9 records as above,
    the facilities and timeout entries can be in any order, but the loading
    of the file is fastest if they are ordered modem timer, exchange timer,
    then facilities 1 to 6.
    Errors in the file will not normally stop the reading and loading, but
    will be reported. Reported Facility errors mean corruption of the
    facility data, and should be corrected before attempting to use the
    errored facility.
    Timer errors will be ignored and the errored timer value set to the
    default of:

        MODEM_TIMER= 5
        EXCHANGE_TIMER= 90

    If the default timeout values are not suitable for your application,
    they can only be varied by using an editor on the .INF file to change
    the values.
    When the .INF file is "Saved" from the "Edit Facility" window, it will
    be correctly formatted before saving, so will read next time without
    errors. However, SETPHONE is not able to check for the correctness or
    otherwise of the actual parameter values.

  .HLP File:
    This file is intended for use only by BUBBLEGEM. It relies on the
    records being correctly indexed, so if you fiddle with it and mis-align
    the records, you will get some even less helpful advice from BUBBLEGEM.
    For that reason, it is set as a read-only file to prevent inadvertant
    editing.


Comments , etc.
  Any comments, suggestions, questions, etc, can be made to:

    Trevor Thompson        E-mail: t.thompson@uq.net.au


                              0000    ####    0000



