In case you missed this:

IMPORTANT USE WITH HSMODA07.ZIP set up a 32K serial buffer, the ST's 
default serial buffer is only 256 bytes I believe, not near enough!!
High baud rates require a big receive buffer. IG219.ACC needs it too
as it was meant to be ran along Interlink(it can do a 31K buffer if set)
You set HSMODA07 up in the AUTO folder, also in the AUTO folder you may want
to put KRX.PRG or KX.PRG these cut off the KEY click sound and KEY repeat when
a key is held down these can effect the IGDEV program's TAP A TUNE function.
RX.PRG just cuts off repeat.  I tried to put this in the IGDEV progam itself
but it wouldn't work when Idid it that way, still it's useful in other programs
this way.
 
Here's the link I got mine from...
https://sites.google.com/site/stessential/home/all-software



TIPS for IGDEV12:

  If you want to Draw in 320x200 16 colors Set your DESKTOP to LOW resolution
run the IGDEV12 program from the DESKTOP in LOW resolution.  For ease of use
you can ALT-R to medium resolution in the terminal mode to ALT-(S)end the Draw
buffer to to a BBS, then hit CLRHOME key to go back to LOW resolution.  ALT-S
turns the graphics off because some graphics commands will get spit out at
end by the serial buffer and the terminal will try to execute them, not ok.
I had this happen a couple of times as I was testing on Dark Force BBS.
You have to PRESS F10 to turn them back on, it tells you but you might not
catch that at first.  You Hit F1 from the terminal mode to enter the DRAW
mode.  In the Draw Menu you will see selections with Rb this means if you 
do a RIGHT button mouse click it will do something different.  The Draw
progam will work in MED 640x200 4 colors and HIGH 640x400 mono resolution
also. Sometimes when trying to click the mouse in the upper left portion of
the screen it doesn't want to accept it you have to wiggle the mouse a little
and click. It's something to do with GEM and drop down menus even though I'm
not using any.
  In the TAP-A-TUNE section it is a very busy looking display.
I'm sorry but I like synths and electronic music I tried to work all the
GI Sound Tool's (GIST) options in there I could. The main key here is using
| key to select which VOICE you are making changes to and which VOICES you
are using 0,1,2 alone or together.  Some sound effects that when used as a
instrument the STOP type might have to be 0 to hear it. Some of STOP types
you set can effect ALL voices at once.  Once you get the sound how you want
it you can shift octives with the ESC BACKSPACE keys and the \ key. Hitting the
HOME key will shut down the diplays that change, they greatly slow down how
fast you can type the notes. If the display gets messed up it can in the top
portion if just the INVERSE video is on and you type very fast, the ALT-K
will set it to redraw the screen.  It's almost like having a little synthesizer
but a computer keyboard is different than a musical keyboard, no playing 
louder when you hit the keys harder, no pressing several keys at once for
cords. I did everything I could think of like skew pitches, octives.
Like I said a busy screen but it can be fun just messing with the sounds you
can come up with.  There are 2 different RECORD methods F1 uses the
q command Vsync(); for timing and will allow up to 3 seconds between key
presses the F10 key uses a blank note for timing with 200th's of a second
up to 49 seconds but abortable.  The Utility program that converts the n 
commands into the N ASCII stream buffer music will convert either method but
it will not use the q command it will convert it to 200th's of a second one
BYTE max 255 so about 1.25 seconds max delay that you get when doing that.
The N buffer can store 1666 chip notes and you can play notes from and to
within it or you can use the N buffer for storing a IG script and execute
it over and over.  If you have Lee Actor's GIST you can create new instruments
for the TAP-A-TUNE I made a converter program it takes the .C files GIST makes
and turns them into new IG sound effects that you can use as instruments.
   
  I arranged the Draw menu in top down order.  SET things then plot or draw
after SETting COLORS TYPES.  I hope you have fun using IGS and incorporate it
into your TELNET BBS. You mostly select with LEFT mouse Button, reset with
RIGHT mouse button, RIGHT+LEFT mouse button to ABORT in most cases.
The Draw program has some tips, prompts within itself.  If you press the
CONTROL key you get a drawing grid, multiple presses changes grid size.
LEFT SHIFT key prints X,Y coordinates, mutiple presses changes position where
X,Y is printed. The draw grid and X,Y coordinates may appear on top off some of
your drawing but it is not permanate.   We are not all artists
and or musicans but you may have friends that are, ask them for help. One other
thing I thought about was printing line art out and taping onto the monitor 
screen so you could trace a drawing.  You can print on tracing paper. I
You Tubed it.  You tape in onto cardstock first.  I may release a MIDI to IG
sound chip converter.  I will try to do it in my spare time which is very
limited, so we will see.


Larry Mears  June 4, 2023

