                                                            
Yeah, a scroller.. How f**&*!g lame you say. Was done in a rush, sorry... Earx on the keys. Some words from CiH himself shortly. Greetings to all active atarians and esp. The ones that helped me this year.
Extra thanx to Tinker, Havoc and Dforce for their contributions to this intro on such short notice. Also special greetz to Ochrana, the only scener I know in my town. Must persuade him to buy an ATARI one day!
(now moving my ass to make room for CiH...)
                    
The Maggie 10th anniversary issue staggers to completion at last, this has been a 
long time coming, ten years in fact (grin!) This landmark in electronic publishing
history sure has taken a lot of blood, sweat, and, errm, article writing to get
there. I'm not going to go on too long, as writing for a scrolltext is something
that is a special art in itself. Plus, I want to save something for the scrolly
inside the main Maggie program. However, I will tell you to enjoy what may possibly
be the final issue of Maggie, and I'll see you all again in Alive! Magazine soon.
                  
Greetings ricochet at high velocity, but in no particular order to DHS, Cream,
(esp Tao!) The guys who made this intro possible, that is FUN. Also Marcus Binder,
and everyone else who helped out with this issue of Maggie. 
Special greetings go to the Alive! team, and my co-editing friend, ST Survivor,
I look forward to doing more work with you next year! Not forgetting Grey and the
rest of the Polski scene, for organising an unforgettable party last Easter, 
likewise Setok, Aggression, and Fit for making 2 Alt worth the trouble. Then, 
there are our largely missing co-collaborators, the Reservoir Gods, and surviving
fragments of the UK Atari scene such as Torment. Hope they spring back to life
shortly? More greetings still to go out to Nature, Wildfire, Yescrew, hope you
can bring some of those perpetually unfinished projects to completion. Not forgetting
Red Specter and New Beat, locked in a softsynth arms-race? Finally, and I know 
this is missing a whole bunch of people out, a big hi to the organisers of the
STNICC and Error in Line parties. If things go to plan, you should be reading
this at the former of those two parties! Okay, if your name isn't otherwise
in there, consider yourselves greeted!
                    