OK folks - XaAES beta 5 is upon us....

Sorry if folks were hoping for a more major update ;)

All I can say is that I've had a very busy month & will hopefully make more 
progress for beta 6. I can say that this release gives you more speed 
than any other AES apart from Magic (which is written in assembler, so 
we cann't compete with it) - and that includes oAESis (sorry 
Christer).

New stuff in this beta includes:

o Mouse server finally becomes a device in this release - courtesy of James Cox's
  wonderful new all assembler mouse handling code. This gives much better double
  click detection, and also removes some busy waiting (giving a slight speed up).
o graf_watchbox() now works properly.
o Program launching using shel_write() is more standard (in previous versions
  blocking mode launch was in fact non-blocking), and parents are sent CH_EXIT
  messages when a 'child' exits. Other problems with shel_write() also fixed.
o Menu_text() bug fixed.
o Tear-away menu bars.
o Improved object & form handling.
o Better text editing (in forms) with support for validation strings.
o 16ms minimum timout on evnt_multi() has gone away.
o Improved (if not perfect) mono support.
o Multi-user support (UID/GID setable for launched processes). oAESis/XaAES/Geneva
  joint extension to the GEM standard on that one....
o Desk Accessory loading support
	- on bootup,with setable acc directory
	- on the fly with shel_write() mode 3
o App's and ACC's appear in desk menu, clicking an app selects it's menu and desktop
  (like topping one of it's windows).
o Broadcast messaging.
o Remote (client requested) system shutdown.
o Quick object reject test in draw_object() gives a massive speedup of 
  Thing's directory window re-draws.
o Johan's new rectangle list code gives vastly improved performance.

Outstanding GEM compatibility issues:
o 'Live' window operations.
o File selector - major problem, gotta sort that out as first priority.
o Better mono support (again).
o Why on earth does ESSDecode, LHAshell & Manview all crash. They all 
  use the same GUI library, so if anyone can shed some light there....

Other outstanding issues:
o Window Manager API. As discussed on the XaAES mailling list, the
  underlying stuff is already in place to allow alternative window
  managers to load after XaAES. What should the API be like?
o Docked toolbars - they're cool, and the widget structure of XaAES
  would make them dead easy to do.
o Getting round to putting in Johan's GCC diffs (oops, missed them again - next time,
  I promise).

If anyone fancies doing a re-build with sockets instead of pipes, I'd
love to see it.

Craig Graham.

