
                            LazyBBS Users Guide
                            -------------------


    Terminal

    LazyBBS  does  not  use  sophisticated terminal functions apart from 
    the VT100/ANSI 'Delete Screen' and 'Delete Line', you can safely use 
    it with any  terminal emulator. VT100/ANSI just looks a bit nicer.


    Menus

    Menus  are  hierarchical  and  based  on  hotkeys,  you just need to
    type the letter of your choices. Some choices may require user flags 
    your sysop attributes.

    
    Mail reading

    Conferences  are  split  in  several  groups accessible through menu
    items.  Once  you  have  selected  a  group,  a  conference selector
    allows  you  to   choose   one  conference.  The  messages  are  now
    displayed  and  you  can browse through the message base ([P]revious
    message,  [N]ext  message,  [G]oto  message  number), and scroll the
    message  itself  ([H]ome  [M]ore).  An easy way to read your mail is
    to  use  the  space  bar, that scrolls messages and jump to the next
    message  once  the current one is finished. 

    The BBS software sets the  current pointer to the first message that
    arrived  on  the system since the last day you came. If it points on
    message 1, no new messages arrived since your last login day.


    Line editor

    An easy-to-use line editor is provided for writing messages.  If you 
    miss  a  full  screen  editor,  you  urgently  need  an offline mail
    reader, such as a Fidonet point system. Ask your sysop.


    Bulletin

    At  the  'More ?' prompt, when your read a bulletin you can type [C] 
    to  start capture, it displays the whole bulletin without prompts so 
    that  you  can  capture  the  text with your comms program for later 
    offline reading.


    Chat

    Chat mode  is dumb. You'll enter chat mode even if your sysop is not 
    here. It's up to you to quit if nothing happens.


    Download

    Download  is  easy to use. Only the zmodem protocol is provided, but 
    you  should  also  be  able to use Ymodem and Xmodem as Zmodem shall 
    downgrade to them if Z itself does not work.
    
    The  download  limit  on the first day is  small and just allows you 
    to get small files.  It  is  upgraded to the standard daily limit on 
    your second day. Everyone then has the same limit.
    
    You  can  download  ONE  file bigger than the limit per day, without 
    downloading any other file on that day. The "global download" option 
    allows  you  to get  a file  of  any  area  from  a  single  prompt.
    Multiple  file  and regular expressions are accepted in this option,
    that is you can ask for:
    
    lazy* nodediff.a?? tral*.* thing.lzh
    

