                         ZeST Desktop Applications
                         ------------------------- 
                             1991, David Becker

The ZeST interface, desktop and applications should run on all ST platforms. 
520ST users should remove all desk accessories and auto programs. 
ZeST requires a monochrome monitor. 

When first run you will be presented with the desktop, five icons on the 
right, and a credit box in the centre. Click within the credit box to remove 
it (you can recall this box by pressing the right mouse button from within
the empty desktop). The first four icons from top to bottom are the, 

                                  CALENDAR
                           DATABASE(address book)
                                 TYPEWRITER
                                    and
                               PAINT PROGRAM

The icon with the big 'X' at the bottom of the screen is the eXit button.
Simply press once with the left mouse button while pointing at an icon to run 
its application. All applications run in 'static' windows with close buttons
in the upper left hand corner. To exit any program simply click within
its close button. Applications may be called from within other applications 
but only the window on the top will be running. As each window is closed the
program beneath will be re-activated. You may click the eXit icon only when
there are no programs running.  

Calendar 
---------------------------------------------- 
If your ST's system date is set correctly then the calendar will open to the
correct month and year. Use the arrow buttons on the left to step backward
or forward through the months. The buttons at the bottom step through the
years. 

Database 
----------------------------------------------
If the database file "DATABASE.DAT" exists on your boot disk then it was 
automatically loaded when ZeST was run. You can use the arrow buttons under
the display screen to move forward and backward through the entries. Use any
letter key on the left to jump to the beginning of entries starting with 
that letter (if there are any). The print button sends the current entry to 
the printer. The add button creates a new entry and allows you to enter up to 
eleven lines (hit return after each line). If you press return on any empty
line, input will be terminated. Edit lets you change the content of the
entry currently displayed. Delete erases the current entry but asks for 
confirmation. Your database is automatically sorted. If any changes have been 
made, the database will be saved to disk when the window is closed.

Typewriter 
----------------------------------------------
The typewriter sends each line to the printer when the return key is pressed. 
You can enter and edit each line in the text window as it is typed. The
form feed button will eject the printed page. The line feed button sends a 
blank line feed  to the printer (hitting return at a blank line does the same
thing). The slider at the far right controls the left margin and can be set 
by holding down the left mouse button and sliding left or right until the
correct margin setting is displayed.

Paint 
---------------------------------------------- 
SAVE and LOAD
The ZeST paint program creates pictures in DEGAS uncompressed monochrome mode 
(pictures using the extension .PI3). Choose a picture file using the load 
button and it will appear full screen with a moveable capture box. Place this 
capture box over the screen area you wish to use and click the left mouse 
button. The rest of the DEGAS picture is discarded and you will be returned 
to the program with the captured block displayed within the paint window. 
Save sends only the content of the paint window to disk.

CIRCLE and RECTANGLE
Circles and rectangles can be drawn by pressing the icon and moving the cross
hair into the paint window. Press the left button to set the starting point 
for the shape. Slide the mouse to manipulte the size until it is correct.
Hit the left button again to set it down or use the right button to exit 
without making any changes.

CONNECTING LINES and SINGLE LINES
Connecting lines and single lines are drawn using exactly the same process.

BRUSH COLOUR   
Click the brush colour(color if you live in the US) icon to toggle between 
white and black ink. 

TEXT ENTRY 
After clicking the text icon you will be able to move the text cursor into 
the paint window and type any word or sentence. Use the mouse to position the
line and then hit the left button to drop it. The right button aborts. 

BLOCK  
After clicking the block icon you can drag a rubberband box around any part 
of the picture and then paste a duplicate copy in another area. Hold down the
left button while dragging to set the block, let the button up to place the 
block then click again to set it down elsewhere. The right button exits.
After exiting the block function your picture is still retained in a buffer 
and can be recalled at any time by selecting the block icon and hitting the 
right button first instead of the left. Your previous picture block will  
appear and can then be pasted within the picture window. 
The mode button (bottom right hand corner) determines block and text paste
reactions (example:mode 0 is replace and mode 2 is transparent). 

FILL 
After clicking fill, choose the area with the mouse cursor and click the left
button to begin. The right button cancels. Fill patterns are chosen by 
clicking the icon directly below. 

ERASE 
Click here once to bring up the eraser. Hold down the left button to erase 
any part of the paint window. Click the erase icon a second time to clear  
the entire window. The right button exits erase mode. 

SIZE 
You have two different brush sizes. Large and small (how about big and 
little?) Each click of the icon toggles the brush size. 

            ----------------------------------------------------
                 IF YOU MAKE A MISTAKE HIT THE 'UNDO' KEY!


Please remember that the ZeST interface is a demonstration program only. 
You use it at your own risk.  

                                     David Becker 
                                     GEnie mail to D.Becker8 



