

                          README.patch02 file for


               Bywater BASIC Interpreter/Shell, version 2.20
               ---------------------------------------------

                    Copyright (c) 1993, Ted A. Campbell
                  for bwBASIC version 2.10, 11 October 1993

               Version 2.20 modifications by Jon B. Volkoff,
                             25 November 1995

                  Patch level 1 release by Jon B. Volkoff,
                              15 March 1996

                  Patch level 2 release by Jon B. Volkoff,
                             11 October 1997


LIST OF PATCHES TO 2.20:

bwb_cmd.c
   Fixed calling stack level logic in RETURN statement to prevent erroneous
   "RETURN without GOSUB" messages.

bwb_cnd.c
bwb_stc.c

   Changed continuation condition for WHILE, ELSEIF, and LOOP UNTIL
   to be != FALSE, not == TRUE.  More in line with common commercial
   BASIC implementations.

bwb_mth.c
   Fixed initialization in VAL function so that old results are not later
   returned as values.

bwb_var.c
   Added parenthesis level checking to dim_getparams. Using multi-level
   expressions as array subscripts was causing the program to bomb.

bwx_iqc.c
bwx_tty.c
bwb_mes.h
   Added second copyright notice.

bwb_dio.c
bwb_str.c
   Added support for strings longer than 255 characters.

bwb_prn.c
   Disabled tab expansion and print width checks when not printing to a file.

bwb_inp.c
   Fixed LINE INPUT file reads to accommodate strings of length MAXSTRINGSIZE.

bwx_ncu.h
bwx_ncu.c
   New files.  Code for UNIX ncurses interface, compliments of L.C. Benschop,
   Eindhoven, The Netherlands.

Makefile.ncu
   New files.  Sample makefile for ncurses implementation.

bwbasic.h
   Revised defines for MININTSIZE and MAXINTSIZE from 16-bit to 32-bit limits.
   Revised define for MAXSTRINGSIZE from 255 to 5000 characters.
   Changed string length from unsigned char to unsigned int to support strings
   longer than 255 characters.
   Added support for new ncurses package.
   Revised VERSION define to reflect above changes.

To implement these patches simply replace the old versions of the above source
files with the new ones and remake bwbasic.
