
                    Improve Your Compiler

The compiler ACB is a nifty bit of coding (check out how he's handled the
displaying of the two options menu screens for a start). So it's
surprising that the Load & Save Options features are so limited. You can
only load or save OPTIONS.INF. You really need different options for
compiling different programs, and the only way to do that is to keep
editing the set-up.

Wouldn't it be nice to have several .INF files and be able to load or
save the one you want? Well, after a bit of experimenting, I've sussed
out that the following simple changes allow you to use the file selecter
to do just that. This works fine on my set-up and it should work on yours
too, but make sure you have a back-up copy just in case.

If you haven't already done so, add your Compiler folder's pathname to
line 10 so that, whatever the current directory is, it will know where to
find everything without asking. This is well worth it even if you aren't
going to do the rest.
     eg: 10 COMPATH$="D:\STOS\"

Before we look at the details let's look at the theory. We are interested
in two subroutines. The one at line 3600 is for loading OPTIONS.INF. It
is called when you run the ACB and it seems best to leave it alone so
that a default set of options is loaded automatically. I've added a file
selecter version at line 12000 that will be called when you choose Load
Options on either of the menu screens. The subroutine at line 3700 is for
saving options, and I've written a replacement for this.


Cool - so what do I do ?

It's very simple. We're going to edit your COMPILER.ACB so make sure you 
have a backup copy just in case. Now carry out the following steps:

     1.   Load "COMPILER.ACB".

     2.   Edit line 10 as mentioned above.

     3.   Delete 3120.

     4.   Delete 3320.

     5.   Delete 3700-3799.

     6.   Merge "COMPILER.BAS".

     7.   Save "COMPILER.ACB".

     8.   Er...that's it.


Try it. I'm sure you'll find it's a great improvement.
Vegetable rights and peace.


David Wimbush
16 Oct 95
