

First Conviction for Computer Fraud and Abuse

    Robert Morris, the hacker who brought down Internet in March 
1988 with a clever worm program, has earned another claim to 
fame. He is the first hacker tried and convicted under the 1986 
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act. This isn't his first offense for 
"breaking and entering" a computer system. While still in high 
school, he penetrated the system at AT&T Bell Laboratories. He 
was caught and given a verbal warning, as well as a summer 
internship at Bell Labs. Although he plead innocent and claimed 
the Internet disaster was an accident, he was found guilty. His
penalty for clogging the network connecting thousands of 
government, university, and business computers, was three years 
probation and a $15,000 fine.


Hacker Faces Extradition and Blackmail Charges for Trojan Horse.

   Joseph Popp, of Willowick, Ohio, is being held without bail 
for planting a Trojan Horse. Popp claims he was developing a 
program to help health educators teach about AIDS and AIDS 
prevention. Over 20,000 disks containing the program were 
distributed, mostly to European organizations. He was preparing 
to distribute another 2,000,000 when he was arrested. Many of the 
names came from the subscribers list of PC Business World, a 
British magazine.

    The packages had a printed warning that the user would be 
billed for using the disk. The program froze the screen and 
informed the user he must purchase a second disk by sending $378 
to PC Cyborg Corp. in Panama, in order to make the first disk 
work. It also allegedly destroyed data on hard disks.

    Popp is a zoologist with a doctorate in anthropology from 
Harvard. He worked for the World Health Organization as a 
consultant on health education related to AIDS in Ethiopia and 
Kenya. He claims he suffers from mental illness, and the Trojan 
Horse was part of a secret plot by WHO to raise funds for AIDS 
research, planted in his reasearch program without his knowledge. 
He claims WHO officials attempted to poison him, and he committed 
no crime because he made no money from the program, and never 
intended to. Investigators confirm no one paid the fee.

   Popp was ordered to undergo psychiatric examination, and is 
facing extradition proceedings to the UK where he will be charged 
with blackmail and "demanding with menace". The UK is pressing 
for extradition and criminal charges because he obtained the 
names from a british publication. WHO denied any involvement.


Anti-Piracy TV Ads

    The Software Publishers Association has produced a series of 
anti-piracy TV ads. The ads have aired during the SPA sponsored 
PBS show Computer Chronicles.



      
