At fakkin last!!



FAKK OFF!  Sowwy I wuz so rude but I HAD to OK?  Well, is dat Lousy Caans  

cebit thing on release?  Does the jerker know?



I dunno... I was fakkin about!!!!...



Oh...  Coz manicure was talking about it like it was.



Oh... oh well.. bollox to him..... I think that was TOTAL BULLSHIT  about  

him not using ANY of marty's routines... I mean did he really write the    

whole shite from SCRATCH after the vectorballs??? Bollox!!!!!



Yeah yeah!  On the stand now is Tim Moss (hahaha fungus!)  



                        FAKK! Can't draw a stand!



Prosecution: Is it true, Mr Mosshead, that you stole Martin's source and   

called your own?



Mosscunt: I deny it, I am a prick, I still deny it.. you can't prove it..  

ask Archie if you don't believe me....



Prosecution: (moves towards desk and confers with partner) Here we have    

proof of your travesty.  May I remind you Tim that you will be found       

guilty if proven in contempt of court.



Mosscunt: Sorry I am thick I can't talk properly.. I've got grey hair, I   

wanked my way through college.. I am thick... I am Archie's bed mate -     

what am I going on about (fit, fit).. I do not lie.. BUT... I did LOOK at  

marty pooses code... but only a glimpse.



Prosecution: (turns to bench) Ladies and gentlemen.  You have heard tim    

DENY that he has used Griffs code in the vectorballs and other demos.      

(moves towards desk and produces a printout) Here I have, may the court    

note item one of evidence, proof that Tim's supposedly "original" code is  

actually a straight copy of Griffs. (hands it over to judge, who examines  

it thoroughly)



Judge: I see. (stacks away the papers and hands them over to policeman in  

room) Let the jury note that the printouts are indeed the same.  Any more  

questions, prosecution?



Prosecution: No your honour.  Continue.



Judge: Defense... (motions for the defense lawyer to get up)



Defence: Well your honour.. you've seen and heard the prosecution's effort 

to condemn Timmy darling (blows kiss to his loved one) but I ask you this  

and members of the jury.. What do you expect him to do after all Marty is  

a superior coder as are the other hunky members of Inner Circle, so Timmy  

wimmy has no other choice but to at least rip bits of code... (Glances     

towards Tim , walks over, and carefully strokes his inner thigh).. but     

your honour this is not to say that Tim is guilty, just that those sort of 

things could cause something like the ripping of code to be done... 



Judge: Prosecution?



Prosecution: (looks pensive and seems to well ideas/thoughts in his head)  

Well, people, your honour, you have heard and even seen Tim's blatent      

misuse of other people's code for his own benefit (Tim looks uneasy and    

keeps on looking towards Andy the Arfling), and may we note that before he 

LIED to shrug off any accusations and until he was pressured he broke and  

actually admitted he stole code with NO CREDIT to the original authors.    

Now, members of the jury, your honour, if you see through the lies of      

this, this BASTARD then you will send him to die by hanging.



Judge: (looks towards tim and then to defense) Defense, any last words?



Defence: Your honour, I would like to make one last attempt, and bring in  

a witness (walks towards bench)..



Judge: Prosecution, will you approach the bench. (the crowd inside mumbles 

in surprise while the prosecution gets up and while looking confused walks 

and approaches the bench.  A few whispers ensue and they return to their   

tables, with the guard being forwarded to bring in the mystery guest) Tim, 

you can get down now and return to your place. (Tim gets off the wooden    

box that he was standing on behind the stand and returns to sit down next  

to the defense)  May the defense bring in the witness. (crowd looks back)



Defence: Your honour, the defence wishes to call Archie to the stand...



Judge: Agreed.  Archie, sit down.  No, not there.  There. (points towards  

stand)  Guards, remove his bib.



Defence: (walks towards box - shithole now that archie is sitting in it).. 

So Archie.. I'd like to ask you, the accused Tim Moss, whom you know of,   

if I may say, in your own words, how would you describe Tim, his           

character?



Archie: (jaw hanging and swinging from side to side, snot dripping down    

over his mouth, eyes shattered, tongue browned(!)).. Wheeelll eerrh        

heeeesss a veeruy nouice boyy.. heees eeess a goouudd coderurrrr tooo,     

lovelyyyyer baccckkksuuid

e

Prosecution:  Objection your honour.  He's obviously trying to suck up to  

the jury.



Judge: Overruled. Continue.



Archie: Weerrrlll heee isss niiceoieee anddd theyrrrreeee isss nowuuwwoo   

waaay hee could orrr wouuuulod do ittt... everrr..... (blows               

transvetitual(!) kiss towards Tim and Andy)... soo I ddoon't ffinnkk...    

that he cooldd ddooo it...



Defence: Well, so you have good thoughts of him.. (turns to jury) well,    

here's an independant view of the accused... (turns to prosecution) He's   

all yours...



Judge: (motions prosecution)



Prosecution: (taking yet another paper and waving it in front of him)      

Archie, tell me, are you a rent boy?



Archie: Errr... waaaannneennntt bbboooy?? uuuhhh wooo tollddd yuuooo??/



Prosecution: That is not important now.  I have medical proof here that    

you personally have been penetrated by that man over there. (points to     

Tim) Is that true? May I remind you that you are under oath and that       

contempt could lead to severe punishment.



Archie: Ehhhrrr??? Errr,.... okkk aaauy I wasss penetraaaaatttedddddid     

bbyy him, buutt I ddiid iit tooooou heeimm as weeelll..



Prosecution: (amidst gasps among the crowd) I see.  Was this purely        

sexual, boyish fun or was it for the sole purpose to get code from each    

other?



Archie: (faints under 20watt bulb - the heat put him out - can't speak and 

writes it out and an interpreter reads on...) Well, it was for me to get   

some nice code from him and I pleased him with little pricks which is what 

I am coincidently.. 



Prosecution: Let that be noted.



Judge: Agreed.



Prosecution: Now, on the subject of stealing code, we have found when      

Tim's slum was raided several photos of you and him in leather, but most   

importantly, several tubs and syringes filled with Sodium Pentathol.  Did  

you or did you not partake in such activities as to make Griff talk about  

code he did not exclusively want to disclose?



Archie: (glances at Tim who drops his head forward) Yess we did get        

together in mass leather sessions, barbed wire, and other materials which  

we wore (whispers to Tim - was good weren't it wimby)...  and I was the    

one who got around Griff to reveal his secrets but he was a spoilsport and 

I never did get to roger him.



Prosecution: Well,did you or did you not see Tim inject Griff with said    

substance (produces exhibit B - a tub of sodium pentathol and a blood      

crusted syringe)



Archie: ......I did.. yes.. but HE (points to Andy who is sitting on Tims  

lap) made me do it.. and said he'd keep Tim all to himself.. I couldn't    

risk it - I can't live without that plump backside...



Prosecution: Get a hold of yourself.  But may I ask you AGAIN if you saw   

that man over there (points to Tim) inject Griff with this?



Archie: (hangs head)... Yes I did see Tim Moss do it... (crowd shreaks)



Prosecution: Let that be noted.  Now, Archie, if you could tell me that    

Tim conspired with Andy to take Griff to a London dock and have his member 

cut off because he was in Inner Circle?



Archie: Well Andy and Tim were in my bedroom one day and I did overhear    

them talking about it - I couldn't stand it, as Griff has such a nice well 

shaped member (starts his light breathing - near orgasm) ooh, I couldn't   

stand it, both of my favourite members were in danger.... oooh.. ohhh..



Judge: Fetch the valium (ushers a guard).



Prosecution: I see.  Now, in true honesty, would you say that THAT MAN     

OVER THERE (points to Tim who now has his tounge inside Andy's mouth)      

actually stole Griff's code by devious and criminal methods?



Archie: (glances to Tim and sees the tongue in Andys mouth and Andy's     

hand stroking Tim little spot of a member)... YES I DO!!! (Shouts to Tim)

you cheating bastard... oooh, how could you be so cruel, after all the     

things we shared together.. .after......



Prosecution: (after crowd quitens down) No further questions your        

honour.



Judge: Defence? Any more questions?



Defence: NO your honour (after consulting and licking out Tim a bit more), 

Your honour, the defence wishes to change its original plea of not guilty  

to GUILTY.



Judge: (after quiting down roaring crowd) That is a bit of a surprise.  Do 

you have any reason as to this drastic change?



Defence: My client has reconsidered it and admits that his original        

testimony was false.



Judge: I see.  The jury?



Jury: (after five minutes of thought) All the jury here have a unanimous   

vote (says a tall burly man resembling a member of Inner Circle...), GUILY 

on all counts.



Judge: Then it is done.  I sentence Tim Moss, on the grounds of theft, to  

be hanged until he is dead.



Timcunt: You'll all pay, you'll all be very, very sorry.. you'll see.. cos 

I am off to join Thalion and we'll haunt you.. I have my loverly Nick      

there to suck off so I won't be thinking of you all when I am there.....   

(large hunky (IC members) place white coat on Tim and drag him away        

kicking and screaming)



Tim breaks loose and heads off towards the right exit amidst confusion and 

a screaming, disassembled crowd.  Suddenly, the main doors slam open, and, 

standing there, is a well defined man, all in black, with light and mist   

shining behind him.  "I've come for you Tim." says this man.  A look of    

terror washes over Tim's face as he stumbles toward the nearest exit.      

Another man, almost exaclty the same in all respects (except with an extra  

inch to the bulge) appears before Tim. "Hello Tim" he says.  Tim stutters, 

trembling, he nervously says: "Who are you? Are where did those bulges     

come from?"   "I am Master, and that man over there is the Phantom"  They  

both cross their arms, Tim scuttling like a little rat around the          

courtroom until Phantom produces a gun, slowly rising to point at Tim's    

temple.  He squeezes the trigger.  On, two three shots straight to the     

forehead.  Tim squeals and gets thrown back against the wall by the force   

of the three accurately placed dum-dum bullets that have mashed out his    

head.  Master walks to Tim, leans down to check the work and says:

" How dya feel now you pimple prick eh? (throws thundering right hook to     

tims jaw breaking it in several places).. Go ahead CUNT, make my fucking   

day!" (turns to the manly figure of Phantom) " Go ahead, now pay your      

respects to the cunt" Phantom walks over to Tim, unzips, takes out his     

enourmous pego and starts pissing over Tim, "You were always a piss        

artist!" he laughs, puts an arm around Master's burly frame and they walk  

off into the sunset...



(Quartet THE END music plays away....)





