PROGRAMMING METHOD

I created all the graphics with DEGAS Elite.  I believe in using 
all the tools at hand; why spend days of writing code to produce 
detailed screens when in a few hours you can have a professional 
looking, fully detailed screen with all the creatively fancy 
weirdness you want?

Once I made a screen, I digitize the key coordinates and store 
them in data statements so my programs know where everything is.

SOUNDS, EASY

GFA BASIC provides some simple means of producing sound.  The 
command Sound in its normal form allows you to play a particular 
note in a particular octave at a particular volume.  Example:

     Sound channel, volume, note, octave, duration

This command will allow you to play only EXACT notes.  You cannot 
use this command for the smooth transitions in the vibrato 
setting.  You will need to use a variation of the command:

     Sound channel, volumn, #PERIOD, duration 

In this way, we can set the #PERIOD to any frequency we wish be 
using the following formula:

     #Period = TRUNC ( 12500 / frequency + 0.5 )

The problem is, we need to know the frequency of each note to use 
the command.  Conceivably there is a chart somewhere that shows 
all the frequencies, but I was unable to locate one.  Lacking 
that, I wrote a program to "tune" the frequency value to the note 
played by simultaneously playing the specific note and octave 
function against the frequency sound function.  Then I would "make 
it match" by ear.  After a few hours, a fistful of hair, 
complaining neighbors and a now tone-deaf sense of hearing, I had 
the equivalent frequencies worked out.  They are stored in the 
file called "NOTEFREQ.DAT".  You can take a look at it from the 
Desktop.

After all the difficulties of the notes were worked out, I needed 
to add the capability to make the thing sound like something other 
than a "computer."

By adding vibrato, sustain, etc. I found that I had fallen into 
the same trap that the digitar designers had--my three-voice 
sound capabilities had dropped to one, leaving me unable to make 
the thing do chords without tearing out more hair.  Due to the 
fact that I really enjoy not being bald, I decided that the 
program was just fine in spite of that.

SUMMING UP

Guitar Solo represents a simple exercise in using the tools at 
hand--simplicity of design, simplicity of use.  Isn't that what 
an ST is supposed to be for?

I encourage you to experiment with the program - dig around, see 
how various things are done.  Some nice features to add could be 
MIDI, chords, music scoring, etc.  But most of all, have a little 
fun!


