





Documentation -- The Lazy Labeler v1.0


    Raison d'etre

         This program was written in GFA Basic for two reasons: 1) To fulfill
         a personal requirement of a program which would automate the printing
         of disk directories on 3 1/2 disk labels, and 2) To explore the
         capabilities of GFA Basic.  The program was written to print the
         top level directory of the disk to the screen/printer.

    Use of the program

         Use of the program is, hopefully, self-explanatory.  The menu bar
         shows the selections available within the program.  Explanation of
         the options available under each selection is as follows:

         DESK
           About Lazy Labeler -- Alert box shows the name of the program,
                                 language it's written in, programmer's name,
                                 and version number.

         CONFIGURE
            Drive select -- Select which drive the disk(s) to be read will be
                            located, A: or B:. The program defaults to drive
                            A:.
            Label length -- Select the length of the disk label to be printed.
                            The system assumes a label width of 2 3/4 inches,
                            allowing for 3 filenames per line on the printer
                            label.  The 1 " and 2 " labels have top margins of
                            3 lines; the 3 " label has a top margin of 10
                            lines to allow for the part of the label which
                            folds over. The program defaults to the 3 "
                            label length.

            Volume label -- Select whether to print/show the volume label of
                            the disk. Disks without labels are printed/shown
                            " not labeled". The program initially defaults to
                            no volume label printed/shown.

            Bytes free   -- Select whether to print/show the number of bytes
                            free on the disk. The program initially defaults
                            to not printed/shown.

         OUTPUT

            Screen       -- Select disk directory print to the screen.
                            The directory is formatted five filenames per
                            line.

            Printer      -- Select disk directory print to the printer.
                            The directory is formatted three filenames per
                            line.












         MODE

            One label    -- Read and print one label.

            Loop         -- Requests insertion of disk into selected drive,
                            reads the directory and shows/prints it, and then
                            repeats the insertion request for a new disk.
                            Hitting <RETURN> or selecting YES continues the
                            looping. Selecting NO stops the looping.

         STARTSTOP

            Go!          -- Execute the program.

            Quit         -- Exit the program.

    NOTES:

         Attempting to run the program without making any selections brings up
         an alert box informing the user that a selection needs to be made
         from the OUTPUT menu and the MODE menu each.

         Select both the Screen and Printer options if you want to display the
         directory on the screen and print it out on the printer.

         The Volume Label and Bytes free options can both be selected to be
         displayed/printed.

         The 3 " label length option allows a maximum of 60 filenames to be
         printed on the label.  The maximum number of filenames, and
         subdirectory names allowed in the directory is 112.


Feel free to make any modifications/improvements to the program.  This program
was and is an education tool.  It fulfills my requirement as it stands now,
but you may have different needs.


Richard Antley
01/21/87





















