This is a transcript of an interview with Jeff Minter in the latest issue of
EDGE magazine (issue 10). This article is the copyright of Future Publishing.

--

AN AUDIENCE WITH JEFF MINTER : Edge shares a spliff with Jeff Minter - a man
deeply in love with sheep, goats, llamas and Jaguars...


Few people who've had a computer over the last 10 years can have failed to
notice Jeff Minter. His games are very original. As is his taste in beasts-
which includes goats, sheep, camels and llamas. His appearance is shaggy - 
and he's the one man who, if told he is acting the goat, will take it as a
compliment.

Jeff has carved a little niche for himself in games history, being the
inventor of the camel shoot 'em up, light synthesiser and numerous exotic
game sub-systems, which have alternately delighted and baffled the public
for the last 12 years.

After a period of success with his label Llamasoft, Jeff vanished for a while,
and passed his time skiing in France and writing games for the doomed Konix
game system. At Llamasoft's lowest ebb he wrote a groundbreaking shareware
game called Llamatron, based on Eugene Evans' classic Williams game, Robotron,
which swept the board and became the most popular shareware game ever.

This dug Llamasot out of a big hole, and enabled Jeff to take stock and firm
up his already tight relationship with Atari - for whom he now develops games
and sub-systems for the Atari Jaguar. In fact, he's currently working on a
light synthesiser for the Jag's CD-ROM unit, with his spin-off business,
Virtual Light Company, whose usual task is to go to rave gigs and concerts to
set up their industrial strength light synths.

Jeff lives in a remote valley in Wales, and divides his time between there and
Sunnyvale, California (where Atari are based). He also has a little place in
France from where he skis.

His conversation is peppered with sheep references, like his house, which has
toys, posters, pictures and models of sheep, goats, llamas and camels - plus
mementos from his trips to Peru.

Jeff has a 486 PC Tower, an Atari TT with Jaguar development system, and
various other computers and systems. There's also about four or five arcade
machines dotted about, with his two sheep, called Molly ("has her charms but
she's not Flossie") and Flossie ("the prettiest sheep in the world") rambling
around them.


SO, HOW DID YOU GET INTO CODING ORIGINALLY?

Originally? When I was at sixth form college in about 1979 they had a
Commodore PET. I just wandered into the room and there was some guy playing
this very simple driving game. I asked the guy, "Where did you get that game?"
and he said "I typed it in".  

So I went off to the library, borrowed a big book on BASIC, came in early the 
next day - and that was it, they got me. I loved it, fell hook line and sinker
for it. I stuck with BASIC for about three months, and soon ran out of 
horsepower, so I learned 6502. On an 8K Commodore PET? But a bloody good 
grounding - if you can code on that you can code on anything!

WHAT WAS YOUR FIRST LLAMASOFT GAME?

Andes Attack on the Vic 20. We were amazed because we duplicated copies of
this game and we went to a computer show. We sold them for a tenner a shot -
and we sold out on the first day!

At that time all the UK coders were getting away with murder, they were
writing
really crap stuff that was all written in BASIC - and I'd been writing in code
for a few years, and people were just amazed! That game did quite well in the
States, and then I wrote Gridrunner which also did quite well in the States
and
earned me a nice little pile of money.

YOU'VE GOT SOMETHING OF A REPUTATION FOR NEW CONTROL SYSTEMS. DID BEING
TOTALLY
ORIGINAL EVER BACKFIRE ON YOU?

I always tried to do new stuff, and in fact sometimes I got a bit slagged off
for being too new. I remember doing Mama Llama and Julian Rignall gave me a
right slagging for it because he didn't like the control method. You didn't
have any bullets - you had that inertial droid. It took quite a while getting
used to it, but it was quite a good game when you were used to it.

He totally trashed it in ZZAP 64 - toasted it, in fact. That really spoiled my
chances with the distributors, because they were taking quite a lot of notice
of that magazine at the time. So it didn't really get out there as much as the
other games. I was molto pissed off about that.

Game design is so over-simplified now. You look at a game like Defender or
Star Gate, you've not only got a joystick controller you've got normal control
of thrust and stuff like that, and with acceleration you have to learn to fly
the ship. Whereas you look at a modern arcade shoot 'em up, you push the 
joystick up/down, left/right, and you're scrolling through a rigidly defined
playfield where everything appears at the same time - everything's on rails.
It's just a regression.

DO YOU SEE THIS CHANGING OR WILL IT GET WORSE?

I like the idea that with these new systems - this 64bit stuff - where you can
build 3D worlds, people aren't going to put up with stuff running on rails. I
think it happened because Sega and Nintendo stuff is aimed at younger people,
who don't want complexity in their games. But I think it makes a game a lot
more interesting.

I remember Virus getting slagged off and that was just the best game ever. And
yeah, sure it took about two or three days to learn how to fly the ship, and
it
took a couple of weeks before you could handle yourself in a dogfight, but
when
you could the feeling was ace. To move into a cloud of mutants spiralling
around
you and just kick butt. That would make a lovely game on the Jaguar actually,
Gouraud shading and texture maps...

YOU MENTIONED DAVID BRABEN'S VIRUS, SO WHO'S CODING DO YOU ADMIRE?

Loads of guys. Braben of course, Tony Crowther, Andy Braybook. Obviously Jez
San
is really good, he does some wicked 3D stuff. There's some people in the
States
too, there's a guy called Rob Zdibble [I think they mean "Zdybel"!] who worked
for Atari for a long time. He's actually working on the 64bit version of Star
Raiders! I cannot wait!

ALL THE OLD SOLITARY CODERS ARE NOW IN PROGRAMMING TEAMS IT SEEMS. WILL YOU
ALWAYS WORK ALONE OR WILL YOU CREATE A TEAM ONE DAY?

That was an option when Llamasoft was doing really well - we could easily have
turned into a software empire. We had the reputation, we had the money, we
could easily have started getting people in to do the coding. But I never
wanted
that - I wanted Llamasoft to be for my output. Now obviously I have to work
with
graphic artists and musicians.

That works if you've got a good rapport with the team, if you can actually put
across your ideas, the stuff that you want. With Atari, they like the fact
that
they can give me something to do, and I run off with it and do it on my own...
and probably do something different to what they thought of!

That happened with Tempest, for example. It is still possible for an
individual
to work in this industry, even if we do have to work with teams. On the next
project after the light synth I'll be doing a CD-ROM product and coming up
with
the more psychedelic stuff. I like the idea of getting a reputation as a
psychedelic programmer.

YOU COULD HAVE "PSYCHEDELICIST" ON YOUR BUSINESS CARD...

Or perhaps "Psychediliac". Or should that be "Psychedeli-yak"!

SO YOU DO GET "PROJECT MANAGEMENT" FROM ATARI, BUT DO YOU GET THE FEELING THEY
TRUST YOUR INSTINCTS?

Yes. The guy who is my director, John Skruch, is a really excellent dude. He
handles me really well, given he's got to take care of someone like me in a
commercial environment. He knows how to ask me to do things without laying the
pressure on too much. And he knows if they really need something I'll stay up
late and pull the stops out.

He's doing his job very well in that he's keeping me sweet, but I bet there's
times he wishes he could handle me like a normal programmer. "Do this and do
it now". But, you know, respect to him because he doesn't.

ARE YOU LED BY HARDWARE?

I was certainly well turned on by the Jaguar, and as soon as I saw it it was
immediate lust. I wanted to take it into my life. I like that rush you get
from
a new bit of technology coming out.

The other reason I love the Jaguar is it's so easy to program. If you've
programmed an ST or an Amiga you can go onto the Jaguar straight away. It's
all
laid out logically, you don't have to write in any arcane DSP language that
looks like Martian - all Ls and Ks and Qs. It actually looks a lot like 68000
and it makes sense. It just happens to go damn fast as well!

HOW ABOUT THE LIGHT SYNTH? DID YOU INVENT IT OR DID YOU GET THE IDEA FROM
SOMEWHERE ELSE?

My earliest inspiration was being 11 years old, laying in a dark room, and
listening to Pink Floyd's Dark Side Of The Moon. I just used to lie there and
let my weird kiddy's imagination run off.

The second stage of the evolution was a party I was invited to when I was 14.
Somewhere on the slope to drunken oblivion, I noticed these disco lights...
you
know those little traffic light things that sort of pulse vaguely in time to
the
music. I remember thinking to myself that there must be a better way of doing
it
than that.

And you know when you daydream in a boring class about being in a rock group - 
well I'd have those daydreams, but they'd always involve big screens, lights
and
lighting effects. I never had any idea of producing it, I just assumed one day
somebody would make a machine like this and I'd be able to buy one, and I'd
play
it in the same way people play a guitar.

It was years later when I was programming the C64 that it all happened - I was
out running and this algorithm just popped into my head. It was the basic
flow/
delay line algorithm that you see there on the Jaguar, the basic Trip-A-Tron
effect, and I came back and coded it up. It was the only point that I thought
I
might have discovered something new, as opposed to re-engineering someone
else's
stuff.

People are trying to do the same kind of stuff, but from what I've seen
they're
still so amazingly primitive, they still think colour cycling is a pretty neat
idea. I can't however claim it's a completely original idea, because there
have
been people down the years who've tried colour organs, and things - for almost
100 years I think.

After I'd started coding the first light synth, I found a book by John
Whitney,
the guy who invented the slit scan effect at the end of 2001:A Space Odyssey.
Well he wrote a manual for writing a light synthesiser. It was done when you
couldn't do a lot of stuff in real-time - he had Pascal programs that would
plot
out these things in non-real time. He was saying there how different
harmonies,
different phases could correspond with notes on a musical scale, and how the
results would be very pleasing.

So I don't think I can claim it all as original, but I had it in my mind
before
I saw anyone else doing any work like that. But it's been six, seven years
since
I released any new light synth stuff. To be able to put a version out in the 
home domain... it's going to surprise people.

Play an audio CD on the Jaguar and the screens going to do that! I can crash
my
cleaning lady with this stuff. She comes in here and if I've got something
good
on there she'll just stop and stand there, slack jaw, standing still for about
five minutes.

SO YOU'VE FOUND A BUG IN YOUR CLEANING LADY?

Well, not so much a bug as a slight susceptibility.

AHH... WELL, THANKS JEFF.
