NB: This document is not finished but since I guess I'll never get myself
NB: bored enough to complete it, it's released as-is... To contact me, try
NB: netmails to wtp (2:204/419.7@fidonet.org), wtp (90:1100/110.7@NeST.ftn)
NB: or wtp@wtp.ct.se (e-mail address for those with internet access...)

                            Official Documention For

                             Rez Fooler Control v 1.0
                                 Rez Fooler v 1.2

                             Copyright (c) '93, WtP


Standard disclaimer note:

The author cannot be held responsible for any damage caused by the use or
misuse of this program. The program may not be sold without the written
permission of the author, the program may be spread freely as long as both
the program files and this documentation is included in the package.

Contents:

What is Rez Fooler?
How do I use it ?
What is Rez Fooler Control?
How do I use it?
How do I use it then I'm an advanced computer owner





















What IS Rez Fooler ?

Rez Fooler is a program that (hopefully) will fool your Falcon and make it
think you've got another kind of monitor connected than the one actually
connected. This is mostly because some demos won't run on a standard TV, 
although it should (from the programmers point of view, there is no
difference between a standard TV and a RGB monitor).

Another way of using this program might be if you've got a multisync monitor,
that can do RGB & VGA monitor modes, then you can probably use this program
to quickly access all the different resolutions by the set video (this means
that you can change monitor type and then set video to use all video modes
almost instantly). This is not tried (AFAIK) yet, so, if you do try it, please
contact me and inform me if it did work or not.

Rez Fooler can be run from Auto folder or from the desktop (or your standard
shell program), but I recommend you to put it in your Auto folder. It will
install itself and confirm that it could do that without any problems, or,
it will tell you that an error has occured. It will install it's own cookie
in the cookie jar (RTFW, the value of this cookie points to the start of the
text segment, and after the initial branch follows some information, it's
structured as follows:

text+	0	Initial branch (The highest byte of this word should be $60)
	2	Got (the type of monitor you've actually got)
	4	Want (The desired monitor type)
	6	Version, a value of 120 means RezFool version 1.2

(But few will use that structure directly, and I personally recommend you
(if at all possible) to use the Rez Fooler Controller