

MAS: Modula-2 Algebra System
----------------------------

Release notes for Version 0.60, March, 1991.

Heinz Kredel, University of Passau, Innstraže 33, D-8390 Passau, FRG.
              Tel: (49) 851/ 509-315, E-mail: kredel@unipas.uucp 


The major changes between release 0.30 and 0.60 are:

      1. added language extensions for specification capabilities,

      2. added a parser for the ALDES language and 
         possibility for interpretation of ALDES programs,

      3. added a linear algebra package,

      4. added an interface between the MAS language 
         and the distributive polynomial system,

      5. improved symbol handling by hash tables 
         combined with balanced trees,

      6. EMS support for IBM PC implementations.


The minor changes between release 0.30 and 0.60 are:

      1. PRAGMA construct for the state definition of 
         the MAS executable program.

      2. Overloading of MAS arithmetical operators 
         by generic function names.

      3. Typed string constants in MAS expressions.

      4. VAR parameters in MAS procedure declarations in 
         ALDES style.

      5. Static scope analysis by the parser.

      6. Explicit stack overflow check since not all compilers 
         handled stack overflow correctly.


Release notes for Version 0.30, November, 1989.

     1. The MAS parser has been changed for better Modula-2 
        compatibility. 

     2. MAS LISP has been made more robust against incorrect 
        user input.

     3. The MAS main program has been enhanced to recognize 
        the following command line parameters: 

                -m number-of-KB     

                -f data-set-name

        - the memory option '-m' gives the number of Kilo-Byte
          storage, requested from the operating system. This 
          number includes the space reserved for the editor and
          other system calls. The number should be larger than
          about 250-300 on an Atari ST with microEMACS. 

        - the file name option '-f' can be used to overwrite the
          default file name 'MAS.INI' during startup. With this
          option MAS can be run in batch mode if the EXIT 
          statement is contained in the data set.


     4. For the IBM PC version at least 512 KB memory is required,
        but it is recomended to have at least 640 KB.
        In case of problems starting MAS you should remove any
        additional device drivers from CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT
        or any other program that needs memory.
        
        The MAS version compiled with the Topspeed Modula-2 Compiler
        uses EMS if present. Memory from EMS will be activated 
        after 10 Garbage Collections or by the MAS function USEEMS(). 
        There is an additional command line parameter:

                -t data-set-name

        - This parameter defines an temporary data set name 
          used for storing MAS memory during external command 
          invocation. The default for data-set-name is 
          'CELLMEM.TMP". i.e the temporary data set is created in 
          the actual directory. If you have a RAM-Disk installed, 
          say on drive 'R', then with "MAS -t R:\temp.tmp"   
          MAS will use the RAM-Disk for the temorary data set.

