                        System Map Utility

              Copyright 1987 Marathon Computer Press 
                     All rights are reserved


     This utility will poll all active drives A-P and return the 
total free space for each drive. (Ram Disks included)  It checks 
the date to see if it is current, if so it tells you that a clock 
card is "INSTALLED".  If the date is older than 1986 it tells you 
"NOT HERE" & what the default date was.

     It tests the total amount of ram available to the system up 
to 16 Megabytes and prints out the information along with the 
total free disk space contained on all drives.  Be patient if you 
have a Hard Disk drive because it takes a while to check the free 
space on a partition.

     Since Gemdos always returns a value of at least 2 drives 
installed, you are asked if you would like to check free space on 
disk drive B.  If you say yes and it's not, it'll tell you to 
insert disk B into drive A.  So it is pointless to check drive B 
if it is not actually installed, it's your choice.

     A printer check is included to see if there are problems with 
your printer.  If a problem exists, or if the printer is turned 
off, it will take the program {Gemdos} approx. 30 secs. to 
acknowledge and a line will appear underneath the Printer line to 
tell you there is a problem.  Be patient if this happens as it 
will take 30 secs.  It's best to select NO in the alert box if you 
know for a fact that your printer is not on;  once again it's your 
choice.

     This program must reside in the same directory with the files 
Disk.Rsc & Map.Dat.  You may place them in a folder if you choose.
The program will not run in an Auto folder because it has GEM 
features.

     Program and documentation (c)1987 Marathon Computer Press.  
No portion is to be sold in any form, including with any Public 
Domain package distributed by a business.  This one is on the 
house as long as it is not sold in any form.  All rights are 
reserved.

                    Marathon Computer Press
                         P.O. Box 68503
                  Virginia Beach, VA 23455-9433

      At Marathon We Go The Distance For Creative Computing!

               Program and Documentation written by 
                          John B. Holder
                  Senior Software Engineer, MCP

                          23 March 1987

