



                            H.A.Z.E.L.
     A Selective Loader for AUTO programs, Desk Accessories,
                 ASSIGN.SYS and DESKTOP.INF Files


            In the Public Domain, Freely Distributable


                     By Greg "Maddog" Knauss
               Copyright 1989 Magnum Opus Software
                            So there.



     When I first got my hard disk, I filled it's boot partition 
with tons of STUFF:  About a dozen desk accessories, GDOS, 
FOLDRXXX, key macros, ASSIGN.SYS files.  Everything I could get my 
grubby little hands on.
     This, of course, led to problems.  My communications program 
dislikes GDOS, the ST can't handle more than six desk accessories 
at a time, and I was continually toggling filenames from 
"ASSIGN.SY" to "ASSIGN.SYS."  I still loved having the hard disk, 
but it was taking me ten minutes each time I booted up to arrange 
all the files the way I wanted them.
     I had heard of several programs that allowed you to select 
which programs your computer ran at boot-up, but each one bothered 
me in some little way.  Either they would appear each time you 
turned your computer on, or they had an awkward system for 
selecting files, or...
     And so HAZEL was born.  With HAZEL in your AUTO folder, you 
can choose which AUTO and desk accessory programs, and which 
ASSIGN.SYS and DESKTOP.INF files you want loaded.  The usual.  
But, since she's written in GFA Basic 2.0 (and Mergeable into 
3.0), you can easily modify her to do whatever you want her to do.


                         INSTALLING HAZEL


     There are two ways to install HAZEL, one simple, and one a 
little more complex.

                         The Complex Way

     The complex way: Copy everything in your AUTO folder over to 
another disk and delete the entire folder by dragging it to the 
trash.  (If you don't have an AUTO folder, skip this step, silly.)  
Next, create a new AUTO by pulling down the FILE menu and choosing 
"New Folder..."  Enter the name as "AUTO" and press RETURN.  Move 
into this new folder by double-clicking on it and create another 
new folder, called "HAZEL", INSIDE AUTO.  Now copy the file 
HAZEL.PRG into the AUTO folder.
     AUTO programs are loaded in the order they were placed in the 
folder, so HAZEL MUST be the first file you copy to the newly 
created AUTO or she will not work correctly.  Once she's over, copy 
all your old AUTO programs back or install new ones.

                          The Simple Way

     Alternately, the simple method involves getting a hold of 
Charles F. Johnson and John Eidsvoog's AUTO_ORG program.  It 
allows you to easily and quickly rearrange the order that your 
AUTO programs will be loaded.  When you run AUTO_ORG, just make 
sure that HAZEL.PRG is the first program in the reorganized 
directory.  Now, save your reconfiguration, exit the program, 
enter your AUTO folder by double-clicking on it.  Select "New 
Folder..." from the "File" menu on the desktop, and create a new 
folder, INSIDE AUTO, called HAZEL.

                           Other Stuff

     Now that HAZEL is installed, you'll need to set up different 
ASSIGN.SYS and DESKTOP.INF files for her to use.  HAZEL thinks 
that any file in the HAZEL folder that has the extension .SYS is 
an ASSIGN.SYS file.  For instance, I have two ASSIGNs on my hard 
disk, TIMEWRKS.SYS for TimeWorks Desktop Publisher and WORDUP.SYS 
for WordUp, both of which are in the HAZEL folder.  (The 
ASSIGN.SYS files, not the programs themselves!)  Also, any file 
that ends with .INF in the same folder is considered to be a 
DESKTOP.INF file.  I use LOW_RES.INF and MED_RES.INF.  To create 
this type of file, just save the desktop how you want it for each 
file, then move the DESKTOP.INF file into the HAZEL directory and 
rename it to whatever you like, making sure the extender is still 
.INF.


                         HOW TO USE HAZEL


     HAZEL is now ready to get to work.  Reboot your machine and 
as soon as the screen turns white, hold down the left SHIFT key.  
If you hold the key down before the screen turns white, the ST 
doesn't know it's been pressed and will continue like nothing's 
happened.  Holding the left SHIFT will bring up HAZEL; if you 
don't press the key down, she'll just wave as she goes by.

                           Auto Programs

     You should be presented with a title page, then a listing of 
all the executable programs in your AUTO folder.  On color 
monitors, files that are set to be loaded will be shown in green 
and files that are to be skipped are shown in red.  On monochrome 
monitors, a highlighted filename means an active file and normal 
printing means inactive.  Use the cursor keys to move the cursor 
around to the different files.  The SPACE BAR will toggle the 
active/inactive status of each file.  For instance, if I'm not 
going to be using a program that needs GDOS, I turn it off because 
I could use the memory it takes up.  Also, I only load programming 
aids when I expect to need help with my code (i.e. all the time.)  
Pressing RETURN will make the changes you've chosen (if any) and 
move on.  As a word of warning, DO NOT reset or turn the computer 
off while HAZEL (or any other program) is doing disk access.  You 
can do some serious damage this way.

                         ASSIGN.SYS Files

     If GDOS is active, you will be presented with a list of 
possible ASSIGN.SYS files from the HAZEL folder.  To keep the 
current ASSIGN.SYS file just hit RETURN, but to choose a new one, 
use the cursor keys to move to the new file you want and press 
RETURN.  This file will be copied to the root directory and 
renamed as ASSIGN.SYS, replacing any that already exists.

                         Desk Accessories

     Next, you will be given a list of active and inactive desk 
accessories.  You can select these the same way you chose AUTO 
programs, but remember the ST is only designed to load six at a 
time.  I have purposely let you select more than six because 
future revisions of GEM might allow it, but do not choose more 
than that for now.

                        DESKTOP.INF Files

     Now HAZEL gives you a list of possible DESKTOP.INF files from 
the HAZEL directory.  Using the same method as choosing an 
ASSIGN.SYS file, pick a new DESKTOP or just hit RETURN to keep the 
old one.  Having two desktop info files is a handy and quick way 
to switch resolutions without mucking about with the OPTIONS menu.  
If I'm going to be working on a game, I choose the LOW_RES file 
mentioned above.  The change in DESKTOP.INF is permanent until I 
use HAZEL to change it back.  Using the OPTIONS menu only makes 
the change until a reboot.

                            Backing up

     Additionally, pressing the BACKSPACE key will back you up to 
the previous selection screen if there was one, so you can easily 
correct any mistakes you made.
     HAZEL will now exit and all the AUTO programs, desk 
accessories, ASSIGN.SYS and DESKTOP.INF files you choose will 
load.
     Pretty simple.


                           HOW IT WORKS

  
     How HAZEL works is simple.  Since she's the first program in 
the AUTO folder, she can grab the computers attention and keep it 
for as long as she wants.  First, she loads in the directory 
pertaining to whichever section of the program is running.  For 
instance, if you're currently selecting AUTO programs, HAZEL loads 
in the filenames from "\AUTO\*.*".  Then she sifts through the 
files only remembering the ones that end with .PRG, .APP, .TOS, 
and .TTP (the executable files.)  She displays the files with a 
complete extender as active and the ones missing the last letter 
as inactive.  Basically, the files are just renamed to toggle 
their "active" status.  Same for the desk accessory selection, but 
she searches for *.AC? files.  Simple as that.  To copy ASSIGN.SYS 
and DESKTOP.INF files from the AUTO\HAZEL path to the root 
directory, HAZEL sets a string to the length of the file, BLOADs 
it into that string and re-writes it to the root.  Even simpler.

                         GFA Modifiable!

     Also, the program is written in GFA Basic so if you want to 
change any part of it, feel free.  The reason I wrote HAZEL in the 
first place was because I couldn't modify otherwise good 
programs.  A middle-level GFA programmer should have no trouble 
adding a hard disk password or a time/date set routine, for 
instance.  Additionally, she's in the public domain:  Every other 
program like her that I've seen is shareware and consequently 
costs a few bucks.

            Other Stuff That Doesn't Go Anywhere Else

     HAZEL will also happily run from the Desktop if you wish.  
Just click on her like any normal program, making sure to hold the 
left SHIFT key down while you do.  She will function normally but 
the changes you make will not take effect until you reboot the 
computer.
     While running, HAZEL does a slight bit of error checking.  
For instance, if you don't have an AUTO folder on the boot disk 
the messages "No AUTO folder..." will be put momentarily on the 
screen.


                             THE END

  
     If you're wondering, yes, HAZEL does stand for something, but 
it's far too silly to mention.




H.A.Z.E.L. is in the public domain and may be freely distributed.  
If you like or use her regularly, I'd like to hear from you -- 
comments, complaints, hours that you're out of the house and a 
list of valuables.  My address is 26513 Rockhurst Lane, Rancho 
Palos Verdes, CA  90274.  Thanks.
