BUZZSAW
*******

by Jason J Railton
programmed in STOS


   Now, you will like this game.  It's sort of like Tetris, but with the
inclusion of small furry animals and circular saw blades (yes, it's that
much fun).  And turn up the sound effects...

   Control is by joystick (left/right/down, fire = rotate), 'P' to pause,
'Esc' to quit a game, and 'CTRL+C' to exit back to the desktop.

   You don't need instructions.  Just play it.  It'll all become clear
within a few seconds of playing it.  There are 10 levels of difficulty,
and you can start on any of the first five levels, for when you get the
hang of it.

   Believe it or not, I actually came up with a plot for this game, but I
won't bother putting it here.  No, it's too silly.  No.  Honestly, it's
ridiculous.  Nope.  No way.  Alright, you persuaded me.


   As a night watchman in a packing crate factory, you may have had to 
deal with intruders, but the last thing you expected was to be in the 
middle of an alien invasion.  Now you are.  A ship full of squads of
miniature marauding mis-shapen aliens chose your first night at the
factory as their night to invade the Earth.
   Fortunately for the human race, a malfunction on their mothership
caused it to drift dangerously low and crash into the side of the factory
where you were on duty.  Power surges from the stricken craft activated
the damaged factory machinery, trapping the hordes of creatures in their
collapsing craft.  As they try to evacuate, they are pulled away by the
conveyer belts to the storage bays of the factory.
   Rushing to the first storage bay, you see it filling up with crates,
manufactured at a phenomenal rate by the super-charged machinery, now
tearing itself apart with the added strain.  Amongst these crates are the 
malevolent beings from another world.  Your only hope is to trap the 
fiends in the disposal hopper, and annihilate them using any bits of the 
disintegrating machinery that should come your way.
   You know that the disposal hopper automatically crushes any rows of 
crates placed within it, but the despicable extra-terrestrials confuse its
simple detectors and remain immune from its powerful jaws.
   Should the stacks reach the top of the hopper, the alien army would 
spill over the top and escape into the unsuspecting world outside.  Only 
you can save the Earth.  How long can you hold back these evil forces?


   Told you it was stupid...
