NAME
	lpd - line printer spooler daemon


SYNOPSIS
	lpd.acc or lpd.prg


DESCRIPTION

Lpd is a spooling daemon to receive files from a remote lpr client and
print them on a printer attached locally.

Options:
	none


ENVIRONMENT

No environment variables are used.


FILES

Lpd.prg accesses variables that are defined in the file default.cfg in the 
STinG directory. Note that STinG reads this file to memory during STinG
startup (auto folder processing). Hence changes to default.cfg take only
effect when rebooting.

lpd.prg supports up to nine printers. This is more you usually can
attach on your ST compatible machine. For each printer attached,
substitute a character 1 to 9 for the small n you find in the variable names
below. The printer name the remote lpr client conveys in his print request 
indexes in this "array" of LPn_QN variables described below.

Per printer lpd.prg needs the following variables:

LPn_QN          Queue Name. Name of the printer. This may be any string you
                like. You will want however to have LP1_QN = lp in
                default.cfg as lp is the default printer when option -P is
                not present.

LPn_LP          Line Printer. Device name of the port. Example: the
                parallel printer port on a ST has the device name PRN:

LPn_SD		Spool Directory. This shall point to a writable directory
		for temporary files.


SEE ALSO

lpr-man.txt, lp-man.txt


HISTORY

An lpd daemon appeared in Version 6 AT&T Unix.


DIAGNOSTICS

This version of lpd has a lot of limitations:

- Access control:
No checks on hosts or users are done. Jobs are accepted from all users and
from all hosts.

- Termination:
lpd.acc and lpd.prg can only be terminated by a shutdown (it properly
handles an AP_TERM AES message). There is currently no other clean way to
end the daemon as it has no user interface.

- Protocol support:
lpd only supports the "Receive a printer job" request from RFC1179. All
other requests (e.g. "Send queue state") are not yet supported.

- Connections:
Currently lpd handles only one connection at a time. A second client
trying to connect concurrently gets an error message.

- Spooling:
This version of lpd has no queuing mechanism. Files received over the
network get stored in the spooling directory and then get printed
immediately.

- Filtering & Formatting
No filtering mechanism is implemented. It is assumed print output directed
to lpd is already in binary format suitable for the printer attached to the
printer device.

All formatting options conveyed by a remote lpr are ignored. Hence no flag
pages, headers, ... are supported.


