                      A brief introduction
                      --------------------

 Welcome to Speedwriter II - the sequel.

 With  this program,  is it possibly to commit yourself  to  some 
very original kind of correspondence,  which will be  immediately 
visible once you start using the program.
 The  revolutionary  thing  about "Speedwriter II"  is  that  one 
doesn't simply type in a letter for another person to  read,  but 
that  ALL control codes,  insertion/deletion of lines,  and  much 
more,  will be stored as well,  causing the program to appear  at 
the  target  reader  as if it is being typed  at  the  moment  of 
playback.
 A very nice idea, thus.

                     Public Domain products
                     ----------------------

 The  products mentioned in this bit,  just like the  product  to 
which this documentation file belongs to,  are freeware, i.e. you 
can  copy  them freely and you don't have to pay for  using  them 
unless you really feel you want to (which would be nice). You may 
find  them on the disk as extra when registering a  LAUGHWARE(TM) 
product (see below).  If not,  you may want to contact your local 
Public Domain library to try and obtain them...

- The Background Music Utility (BMU)
  Working  on the ST can be tedious.  Wouldn't it be nice if  you 
  had  one  of about 25 different pieces of nice  music  sedately 
  running  in the background,  taking up only an extremely  minor 
  fraction of your memory using the ST's built-in sound  routines 
  (which'  capacity  you should  not  underestimate)?  Then  this 
  accessory   is  perfect  for  you.   I  wanted  to  make   this 
  LAUGHWARE(TM),  too,  but  as I didn't actually do any  of  the 
  music myself... I don't want to get into problems.
- Speedwriter II
  A somewhat older 'interactive animated correspondence' utility, 
  including its GfA Basic source.  With this,  it is possible  to 
  send  remarkable  letters that you can see being typed  as  you 
  look, including all cursor movements. Just a nice titbit.
- Write Protect Utility
  Nothing fancy,  this little thingy.  It's just a tiny accessory 
  that  constantly displays the write-protect status of drives  A 
  and  B (if connected) at the left top of the screen.  Works  on 
  all systems!  There's a source with it as well,  which supplies 
  you  with the ONLY RIGHT WAY to read a  floppy's  write-protect 
  status (works on all TOS versions,  with one or two drives,  on 
  any ST/TT system).
- Handy
  A tiny accessory that allows you to do three things: Access the 
  file  selector (handy when using one like "UIS  III"),  Specify 
  date & time, and freeze the system until a password is entered. 
  A source is included so that you can easily adapt the password, 
  and then compile it again (using GfA Basic 3.x).
- Wowbagger the Infinitely Prolonged
  This  is  actually one of the 'absurd' bits that you  may  find 
  included  in  a  LAUGHWARE(TM)  product,   and  which  will  be 
  dismissed  in a registered version.  Wowbagger is an  accessory 
  (including  an editor for its appearance  interval  parameters) 
  that  swears at you at times.  It can swear on the  screen,  or 
  even on the printer.  Several billion swearing words - most  of 
  them really ruthless, insulting and filthy - are possible. Nice 
  to copy on the boot partition of an unsuspecting friend...
- Name Creator
  Although  this program will only appeal to those  into  reading 
  and  writing fantasy fiction,  this utility will be  useful  to 
  those  who  generally  need to think up fantasy  names  in  the 
  category of dwarves,  elves,  etc. Using a database of existing 
  parts of names (taken from  Donaldson,  Tolkien,  Weis/Hickman, 
  McCaffrey and Herbert, among others), you will be amazed at the 
  quality  of the many thousands of different names this  program 
  can come up with.  Creating anagrams is also possible -  though 
  doing  this  with large names will use  LOTS  of  memory.  This 
  program  is  being used professionally by a games  company  for 
  their role playing games.  Word parts can be added,  a  history 
  can be kept, etc...

                  The concept of LAUGHWARE(TM)
                  ----------------------------

 Just above,  I already mentioned the principle of a new kind  of 
software on the market...
 LAUGHWARE(TM)!
 (Eerie sound of drums and string instruments,  with the odd  bit 
of laughter in the background)
 LAUGHWARE(TM) is a special form of shareware, i.e. software that 
you  can  copy  and distribute freely (indeed,  as  much  as  you 
possibly can!),  but that you are expected to pay a  registration 
fee for in case you decide to use it regularly.  This means that, 
should  you  have  the sense of humour necessary to  use  such  a 
program  without  being  driven straight up  the  wall,  you  are 
expected to pay a registration fee.
 Here, the principle of LAUGHWARE(TM) takes over.
 Upon  me  receiving  this  fee,  you  will  not  only  become  a 
registered owner,  but you will also get the latest update of the 
program  sent  to  you  by return  mail.  And  the  clue  is  the 
following:   This  registered  version  will  NOT  have  all  the 
'humorous', slightly 'absurd' touches to it!
 Thus,  the  registered copy of a LAUGHWARE(TM) program will  not 
only  save you memory and disk space,  but very likely also  your 
sanity.
 If  I receive enough money,  and if everybody will refrain  from 
spreading the non-LAUGHWARE(TM) versions of the program,  I  will 
be  persuaded  to continue making more  LAUGHWARE(TM)  utilities. 
I've got dozens of ideas up my sleeve but first I want to look if 
LAUGHWARE(TM) pays.
 Don't let me and other shareware programmers down.

 A  list of LAUGHWARE(TM) programs on offer can be found  further 
in this text file.

 But  let us not stray too much.  You didn't start  reading  this 
file for naught,  now did you? Therefore, we will get down to the 
relevant bit:

                    The Speedwriter II Manual
                    -------------------------

 A  user  manual  is hardly necessary for  this  program,  but  I 
will have a go at it anyway.
 The  most important thing is the HELP key.  This hides  a  small 
user guide to the program,  invaluable during the first couple of 
sessions.
 Basically,  you  need all the keys on the keyboard to type  your 
message as in any other text editor. Just use BACKSPACE to delete 
the character in front of the cursor,  and the arrow cursor  keys 
to move the cursor anywhere on the screen.
 You can also use some other keys for special effects:

 UNDO

 Kills  the current session.  Memory is cleared,  and the  system 
once again is as it was just after starting the program.

 HELP

 The Help screen.

 CLR HOME

 This clears the entire screen,  and positions the cursor at  the 
left top of the screen.

 DELETE

 Deletes the lines on which the cursor is.

 INSERT

 Inserts  a line above the line where the cursor  is.  All  lines 
below that are scrolled down by one line.

 ESCAPE

 Pause key (playback mode only).

 F1

 Puts  reverse  video  on,   i.e.   white  characters  on   black 
background.

 F2

 Puts reverse video (see above) off.

 F3

 Toggle  screen colors.  The entire screen's colors are  reversed 
(black becomes white and vice versa).

 F4

 The disk operation department.  Here, you can SAVE and LOAD your 
"Speedwriter II" data files (.SPW).

 F5

 Run  the  current session from the start,  or  run  the  session 
you've just loaded.

 F6

 An info screen.

 F10

 Quit  the entire program.  The current session,  if not  already 
present on disk, will be lost.

 The program will only work on ST high resolution mode,  and with 
any memory configuration.  There is a demo .SWP file with it,  as 
well as the source (in GfA Basic version 2).

                           The Address
                           -----------

 I can be reached at the following address.  There,  I would like 
to  receive possible donations as well as additional  suggestions 
on  what  other  LAUGHWARE(TM) utilities you would  like  to  see 
programmed.   Although  I  am  not  altogether  such  a  splendid 
programmer,   I'd   like  to  believe  that  my  limited   coding 
capabilities can do quite a bit as long as it's Atari ST/TT we're 
talking about.

 Richard Karsmakers
 Looplantsoen 50
 NL-3523 GV  Utrecht
 The Netherlands

 The  program on this disk and its manual are copyright  1991  by 
Richard  Karsmakers.  However,  you may copy them as much as  you 
want  as  long as the package remains complete  (i.e.  program  + 
document  file  +  other  associated  files).  The  LAUGHWARE(TM) 
concept,  which  was accidentally concocted one reasonably  sunny 
afternoon in May 1991, is not copyrighted - but remember: Ripoffs 
damage your Karma!
 The entire LAUGHWARE(TM) principle is dedicated to Jeff  Minter, 
the cult games programmer who,  by bringing the first  commercial 
game  into the shareware,  convinced me that this cause is  worth 
supporting.
 I  would also like to send greetings to all my fellow  shareware 
programmers on all systems: Ours is the divine cause! Ours is the 
task to change the world of software!
 Or, as Jeff would say: Death to The Men With Suits!

                   The LAUGHWARE(TM) programs
                   --------------------------

 Sure,  there are a few already - one cannot estimate the  market 
with only one product, can one?
 The available titles are/will be:

- The Hiscore Management Utility (HMU)
  A  utility by means of which you will be able to keep track  of 
  all your hiscores for all your favourite games;  invaluable for 
  games that don't save hiscores!  Different databases can be set 
  up for different computer systems, and you can not only specify 
  the game title and the score,  but also remarks (like  'level', 
  'difficulty', etc.). Registration: US$15.
- The Software Diary Utility (SDU)
  A  utility that is actually an electronic diary.  Each day  can 
  get a new page where you want to stuff all kinds of interesting 
  information  like  who you happen to have fallen in  love  with 
  today,  who you've had tea with, and other shuddering emotions. 
  Of  course,  there's  password protection  (and  password-coded 
  files). Registration: US$15.
- The Brain Replacement Utility (BRU)
  Are you the kind of person that keeps on forgetting  birthdays, 
  anniversaries  and  meetings?  In  that  case,  this  extremely 
  flexible  utility  is  made just for you.  It can  warn  you  a 
  specified  number of days before the date,  it can nag you  for 
  things  that  NEED to be done,  and generally  keeps  track  of 
  everything  you  would want to keep track  of.  You  can  enter 
  annual events,  but also weekly or monthly events,  end use  of 
  wild  cards  and statements like 'each first  saturday  of  the 
  month' are allowed. Registration: US$15.
- The Virus Checksum Utility (VCU)
  A utility that adds something to protecting yourself from  link 
  viruses that no virus killer can:  It calculates a checksum  of 
  any  file  on  disk,  and succeeds in  writing  that  in  close 
  connection to the actual file it belongs to,  without absorbing 
  ANY  disk  space.  This  discards the need  to  have  extensive 
  library  files  with  checksums  linked  to  file  names,   and 
  effectively  eliminates  the problems that occur  when  several 
  files  (or several different versions of one program) have  the 
  same name but not the same checksum.  It can also recognise all 
  known link viruses (of course). Registration: US$10.
- The Memory Management Utility (MMU)
  This tiny accessory makes it child's play to specify the amount 
  of memory in your computer that it is allowed to use.  This  is 
  extremely  handy  if you have a 2Mb machine,  yet you  have  to 
  check your program whether it works on half a meg or something. 
  Memory above your new,  lower,  top of RAM can be used to store 
  code, but will not be overwritten in case of a reset! If you're 
  a  programmer  you  will  find  you  can't  do  without   this. 
  Registration: US$10.

 Of  course,  all LAUGHWARE(TM) programs work on all ST  systems, 
including  STE,  MEGA ST and TT - even though owners of half  meg 
machines  may  find their machine's memory running out  when  not 
using the registered, smaller, versions.
 For people living outside Europe, the registration fee increases 
by US$5.
