                  Documentation for SALVAGE.ARC

This  program is designed to aid in recovering ASCII files from  a 
floppy disk that has had the FAT tables or Directory  trashed.   I 
just recovered 87K bytes from such a disk using this program.

Over the years I have had three or so disks that have been trashed 
for  reasons that I have never understood.   The possibility  that 
seems most likely to me is that the memory copy of the FAT  tables 
or Directory got trashed for reasons unknown.  I have tried CHKDSK 
and  recovered  some data this way,  but for the most part  I  was 
unsuccessful.   There are several sector editors that allow one to 
examine the disk contents,  but the ones I have (I have _several_) 
are all terribly slow when you consider the size of a floppy disk.  
I  think  it  took  about 20 minutes total  to  recover  the  data 
mentioned  above.   This  was  basically the content  of  4  files 
produced by a word processor.   I could have retrieved a few  more 
small files if I wanted to spend some more time at it.

The  program is pretty much self directing,  and I  like to  think 
you could run it now without reading this.   But,  here goes.  The 
program  is  divided into two 'phases',  either of  which  can  be 
skipped.   The  first  phase reads every sector on  the  disk  and 
prints  out the first 70 (about) characters in each  sector.  Only 
the  printable  ASCII characters are  shown,  everything  else  is 
converted  to a space.  Files produced by a text editor or a  word 
processor  can  be easily spotted.  Jot down the  first  and  last 
sector number for the readable parts.  The 'logical sector number' 
is shown at the left edge of the screen just before the first data 
byte in the sector.  There are several disk formats in use by now; 
one  of the popular formats produces 1440 sectors,  numbered 0  to 
1439.   Think  of  the area between the first and  the  last  good 
sector  as a 'segment'.    If you are lucky you will have  several 
segments of readable text, one for each remaining piece of a file. 
Your success depends on how often files were deleted and how  long 
the  disk was used after the tables were trashed.   Note that  the 
.BAK followed by .DOC sequence of many word processors means  that 
the  segment closer to the high end of the disk will be  the  most 
recent version.

Phase 2 of the program allows you to copy selected portions of the 
disk  (they are not files any longer,  that's the problem!)  to  a 
legitimate file on another disk.  For this phase of the program to 
be used, you must have two physical disks, whether two floppies or 
a  floppy and a hard disk.   This will present a problem for  some 
people.  You can still use the first part of the program to see if 
there  _is_ anything to salvage,  and perhaps you can  convince  a 
friend with two disks to run the second part.

The program will prompt you for the desired sector numbers.  Since 
this  request is not made via a dialog box,  you can not edit  the 
characters you input.  I avoided the use of a dialogue box because 
it  leads  to the use of an .RSC file and I prefer  free  standing 
programs if it doesn't compromise function too much.   There is  a 
way  out  that  will usually  work,  however.   Three  checks  for 
reasonableness  are  made on the sector numbers.   If you  see  an 
error  before  you press RETURN for the  second  entry,  make  the 
number too big, but less than 32,768.  The program will refuse the 
number  (it's  too big) and allow you  (force  you,  actually)  to 
reenter  both numbers again.   I don't know what the world  record 
for disk capacity is, but a one Megabyte disk would only have 2048 
sectors, so a number larger than 2048 is very likely to be refused 
by the program.
 
For  each segment you want to save,  enter the first and the  last 
sector  number  from your notes.  Each segment will be  put  in  a 
separate file.  SInce this file is perfectly readable you can join 
pieces together,  edit the pieces,  copy files,  etc.  The program 
automatically  produces  a  sequence  of  suggested  file   names: 
001.RCV,  002.RCV,  etc.  up to 099.RCV  This phase of the program 
produces an exact copy, it doesn't change the control codes as the 
first  phase  did.   So you could use it to copy any  sectors  you 
choose,  perhaps  you have some other technique to  locate  usable 
sectors.
 
Good luck in your salvage attempts.

                      Merlin L. Hanson
