6/   Mouse Tricks modules

Mouse Tricks modules should be placed in the folder MSE_TRIX.MOD 
from where they will be automatically run by Mouse Tricks 2.
To disable a module without deleting it, change its file 
extension (say to .MOX) using the desktop 'Show info' option.  
This will prevent it from being loaded when the computer next 
boots-up.

CLK_AL.MOD

     CLK_AL (short for click alert) allows most non-decision 
     making alert boxes (those with just a single button) to be 
     cleared with a single click - wherever the mouse happens to 
     be.  Any keypress will also clear the alert.

     CLK_AL works by monitoring all alert_form AES calls.  
     Whenever the alert has a single exit button, which is also a 
     default button, then CLK_AL calls a special Mouse Tricks 
     routine that emulates a 'RETURN' keypress at the end of the 
     next left mouse click.  This routine will also substitute a 
     'RETURN' for any other keypress that is made.  Because the 
     single exit button is a default button, the alert box is 
     cleared by this 'RETURN'.

     CLK_AL has no effect on alerts issued by the desktop since 
     these aren't made through the AES so CLK_AL can't tell 
     they're happening.  Disk instruction messages (such as 'Put 
     disk B in drive A - OK') also bypass the AES and are 
     similarly unaffected.

     CLK_AL steals the Trap 2 vector, according to the XBRA 
     protocol (with id 'ckal').  Before installing itself it 
     checks whether it was already resident, replacing the old 
     installation if it was (as it must if it is to communicate 
     with an active Mouse Tricks).

     Once resident, CLK_AL occupies just 402 bytes. (If anyone 
     knows how to copy a program back into it's base page, 
     without the computer crashing when the program terminates - 
     please tell me and I'll reduce this by 256 bytes!)

FSEL_RH.MOD

     FSEL_RH (suggested by Peter Crush) switches the right mouse 
     button 'reporting' and 'special effects' to normal while the 
     file selector is active.
     This allows you to use a right button special effect without 
     interfering with the right button use of replacement file 
     selectors (such as the Universal Item Selector or Little 
     Green Selector).
     It is especially useful if you're without joy buttons.

CKAL_FSL.MOD

     Combines both functions of CLK_AL.MOD and FSEL_RH.MOD. 
     Deactivate (or delete) the two other modules before you use 
     this one.

DJ_FIX.MOD

     If you turned on your DeskJet Plus/500 printer after your 
     ST has booted-up it wouldn't print - until Paul Close's 
     DJ_RESET.ACC allowed you to 'reset' the printer port and get 
     the two talking again.

     DJ_FIX works in a similar way (it sets the centronics 
     strobe) but takes up a fraction of the memory (a few hundred 
     bytes) and doesn't hog a desk accessory slot.

     Just press the key combination 'Cntrl-Lshift-Alt D' after 
     switching on your DeskJet and it should work.  You can even 
     press the key combination while the computer is trying (and 
     failing) to print; you don't need to wait for it to 'time 
     out'.

     The key combination can't as yet be changed by the user - 
     that'll come later in a program to handle many such small 
     accessories.

