Not quite 101 uses for an emulator
----------------------------------

Good reason #1. Since the emulator emulates hardware in software, it is 
much easier and cheaper to create the ultimate 8-bit system. How much 
would it cost, let's say, to put together an XL development system, with  
a hard disk and double sided disk drive, printer, and RGB monitor? If you 
already have a color 1040ST, you can emulate this system without much 
extra cost. Xformer runs most of the disk based development packages, and 
of course, Atari BASIC.

One nice bonus with using the ST is that the disks are so much faster. 
Xformer's disk speed is also faster when accessing ST floppies and hard 
disks, so some software, like BASIC compilers, may actually run faster on 
the Xformer than on an XL.

If you do have an 8-bit Atari, you can use it to play video games, while 
using the Xformer on the ST for more serious work like word processing 
and file copying. The same 1050 disk drive can be shared by both machines 
(not at the same time of course).

As already mentioned, printer drivers could be written for all the 
various ST applications to make use of 8-bit printer. They are cheap and 
can found at most 8-bit dealers. 

There are many ST users who never had an Atari 800 or XL, yet they too 
could use the emulator. Atari BASIC is a very easy to learn, and easy to 
use BASIC interpreter. It doesn't support windows or menu bars, or mice, 
but it is one of the classic BASICs from the early 80's. There are 
hundreds of articles in magazines like Antic, A.N.A.L.O.G., COMPUTE, 
which contain type-in programs for Atari BASIC. If you are new to 
programming, why not start with Atari BASIC? Next to ST BASIC, it'll be 
one of the slowest BASICs on the ST, but it does the job.

Are you into graphics? Do you like to collect DEGAS and Spectrum 
pictures? Why not collect Koala Pad pictures? Or other 8-bit graphics 
pictures. There are hundreds of such files available on BBSs, and there 
are a number of slideshow programs, similar to the ones on the ST, which 
allow you to view them. Without using the Xformer, it is difficult to 
view these files on the ST.

At least one newsletter editor is using the Xformer to create screen 
dumps of 8-bit software, something that is extremely difficult to do on 
an 800. Xformer has a special option to save the 8-bit screens as DEGAS 
files, so that they can be printed, edited, or merged with other screen 
shots.

With the new feature of modem emulation, you can use it to call 8-bit 
bulletin boards, and take advantage of the ATASCII character set that 
these boards use.

BBS sysops, user groups, and dealers should find the file transfer 
capability handy. Using the same disk to store both ST and 8-bit files 
makes it a lot easier to maintain the files, while still being able to 
copy them to both the 5.25" and 2.5" disk formats.  

Are you a new ST owner, and are a bit uncomfortable with using the GEM 
based editors? Why not pop into Xformer and run an 8-bit editor? Use 
programs like Text Wizard, Atariwriter Plus, or Paperclip on your ST text 
files. And if you have a printer, you can print out the files at the same 
time.

Although the ST Xformer II software and user's manual will not teach you 
to become an 8-bit whiz, I again refer you to the many Atari magazines 
for reference. I learned most of what I know about the Atari 8-bit from 
articles in Creative Computing, COMPUTE, and Antic. And all I had was a 
48K Atari 400 and an 810 drive!

