Enchant: By Kev 'Taff' Davies

You  may  remember in the last issue of maggie  I  previewed  the
upcoming release of Enchant by Matt Bacon (Candenza Software) and
Paul Jones (PJCO).  It was finally available at ACC '98 and yours
truly  was  there  to  get hold of a copy  (  and  become  œ15.00
lighter).

Enchant is a collection of routines modules and libraries for use
with Hisoft Basic 2 and is designed to replace the now dated  HGT
(Hisoft  GEM Toolkit) by Dave Nutkins and Ofir Gal.  Enchants new
GEM  toolkit  is  far  superior  than  the  previous  incarnation
supportng such modern GEM controls such as the (not so) new radio
buttons  and  flying dialog boxes which  instantly  projects  the
Enchant  toolkit head and shoulders above the older one  but  the
proof of the pudding is ...erm... in the testing.

On the packaging (what there is) there is the statment  "Suitable
for  novice  and Pro users".  All too often software titles  make
this boast and then require a Masters Degree in quantum mechanics
just to make sense of the installation program, but not here. The
installation  is  just  a matter of disk copying  and  then  into
HBasic  to set your paths.  That is all the installation that  is
required.  As  for  the  mannual,  all  I can say is it  is  very
complete  consisting of 3 textfiles each relating to the  various
parts  of  ENCHANT.  So let us examine these parts  (Oh  Matron!)
individually.

The ENCHANT Gem Toolkit

This  consists  of a 20 file modula set up with  4  main  Toolbox
files  and a BH constants file which contain everything you  need
to  make  creating  GEM programs easily  along  with  some  shell
listings ( An accessory shell is also provided) to get you up and
running  quickly.  All these shells require is a few  tweaks  and
some  of your own code and away you go (I had a small program  up
and  running in under two hours).  Also included is  are  NewDesk
access for changing the desktop from within your programs,  popup
menu routines,  menu routines,  dialog routines,  and the  always
inclusive file selector routine, etc.

Using a modula approach allows you to optimize your programs,  to
a  certain  extent,  with  ease.  All the  routines  are  clearly
documented in the accompanying text file and are easy to use.


The ENCHANT Modules

If you want to be a little more ambitious in your gem programming
these modules are superb,  supporting everything from Bubble GEM,
NVDI,  and  Midi Access through to the AV Protocol,  ST-Guide and
more allowing you to give your programs that little  professional
touch  without  too  much  effort.  There is even  a  module  for
complete error trapping (Excellent :> ).

All  in  all this is a class act and the 9000+ lines of  code  it
boasts  are of top quality,  indeed the only niggle I  have  with
ENCHANT  is that it requires a little initial fiddling with  your
compiler options to get the routines to work correctly,  and then
if  you  have to change the 'FN' setting previous  projects  need
editing heavily to accomidaite this change. Also the MOUSE_UPDATE
routine is called during the LOAD_TEXT routine and needs  editing
out if you are not 'including' the CURSOR.BAS file.

All in all this is a TOP addition Hisoft Basic and should,  in my
opinion,  be a compulsory one.  An update is already planned  and
will include Falcon specific commands.  So you Falcon owners  can
grin smugly.

Rating :92%
