    The GFA Object conversion program
    
    Program by Steven Seidl
    Written in GFA BASIC
    
    Congratulations on selecting GFA Object, I am sure you will find GFA-
    Object will provide you with many hours of enjoyment.  While GFA-
    Object has many powerful commands and functions which allow you to
    create many complex 3D designs, you may wish to view or modify a data
    file for a 3D object created with Tom Hudson's CAD 3D II.  Files such
    as these can be found on networks such as GENIE or COMP-U-SERVE, or
    perhaps on a local BBS.
    
    This utility program gives you the capability to convert a CAD 3D II
    data file, into a GFA-Object ASCII format file.  You may then load a
    file created by this program into GFA-Object, manipulate it, and save
    it as a GFA-Object binary file.  I elected to create a ASCII file vice
    the GFA-Object binary file, so that with little modification, you can
    use CAD 3D II data in a GFA BASIC program (or other programs for that
    matter).
    
    Operation of this program really needs no explanation.  You just
    select a CAD 3D II data file (with the '3D2' file suffix) from a
    standard GEM fileselect box, then for each object to be converted, you
    enter the new name for your GFA-Object ASCII file in another
    fileselect box.  The current object's name being converted is shown on
    your monitor.  The only decision you must make is to select between
    edge-only mode, or all data mode.  These two options will be
    explained later.
    
    Limitations of this program are as follows:
    
    1.  Since GFA Object and CAD 3D II use totally different types of
    object structure, it is impossible to make objects appear exactly like
    they appeared in CAD 3D II.  CAD 3D II objects are composed of many
    triangles, which based on their coordinate sequence, and a mode-byte
    structure define how a object will appear.  GFA-Object modules (or
    objects), are composed of points, edges, and surfaces.  What the two
    programs do however have in common, is the fact that both must connect
    their lines and surfaces to x,y,z coordinate points.
    
    2.  Only CAD 3D II files can be converted by this program, it will NOT
    work with CAD 3D version 1.
    
    3.  Since GFA-Object does not utilize the color structure of CAD 3D
    II, the portion of a '.3D2' file that pertains to colors is ignored. 
    Likewise, the light source settings from a '.3D2' file are ignored
    also, due to the different implementation in GFA-Object.
    
    The only option that you must select from, is a alert box that will
    ask you to select either all lines and surfaces, or edges only.  The
    difference between the two files created is as follows:
    
    Edges only:  In this mode, all coordinate points are generated to
    file, but only lines (or edges) that have the proper mode-byte flag
    are generated.  No surfaces can be created in this mode since GFA-
    Object surfaces must be outlined by a edge.  This type of data file is
    much smaller due to the reduced amount of generated data.
    
    All line and surface data:  In this mode, all data is generated and
    written to disk.  Each triangle in the '3D2' file is assigned as both
    as series of 3 edges, and as a surface with 3 corner points.  Due to
    the vast amount of data generated in this mode, assure that you have
    adequate disk space for the ASCII file.  Objects of this type are best
    viewed with GFA-Object's hidden-line removal option enabled.
    
    A commented source code file is included with the file conversion
    program so that you may tailor it to your own needs.  You must have
    GFA-BASIC to execute the source code.  This program is by no means
    a model example of programming, but should serve as a device to
    illustrate conversions of binary to ASCII data files.  If demand
    warrants further development, such as improved hidden-line removal, I
    will consider a future version of this program.  Voice any comments
    you may have concerning this on the GENIE network's MICHTRON RT, of
    which I am a frequent patron.
    
    One final note, this program could also be utilized to transfer CAD 3D
    version II data files to GFA-Object, with the final destination of GFA-
    Draft+.  GFA Draft+ will do the necessary conversions once you have
    loaded a ASCII file into GFA-Object.
    
    I sincerely hope this program is of some benefit to you,
    
    
    Steven E. Seidl
     