   The Stos Rewriter  is a typical example of  what  is known  as 
"artificial insanity". It can take a text that has been typed out
in the SWR format (more on this later) and turn it into  complete 
nonsense.  To  get you started,  there are some examples  in  the 
folder appropriatley named "EXAMPLES".
   To start off,  you can choose to make just one sentence  (type 
1)  or load a text (type 2).  A file selector will appear if  you 
choose 2.  You can now load in the *.SRW file of your choice, and 
away  we go.  You may on the way be asked to enter some  people's 
names  or placenames.  You will hear a bell when you need  to  do 
that. The nouns, verbs, etc will automatically be filled in. When 
you  hear  two bells,  press any key and your text  will  appear. 
First,  you will be asked for a printout (I recomend that if your 
printer can do more than 80 colloms,  set it on that mode (I  use 
Proportional Elite on my Star NX1000 printer).  You will then  be 
asked  to see it again as you probarbly missed the top  part  the 
first time.  If you chose Y,  then hold down space to add more to 
your text or press E to return.  You are asked to save it into an 
ascii *.DOC file,  and then asked if you want to mess up the same 
text again.

The *.SRW file :

Tyoe out the text as you would normally do,  only do not use  any 
capital A's, B's, L's, M's, N's, P's, V's, S's. When you reach a point 
where you want to put a word that is variable, then type in :

Noun :        N followed by its number.
Verb :        V followed by PRE PAS or PER, depending on what tense you 
              want to use, followed by the number.  
Adjective :   A followed by a number.
Adverb :      B followed by a number.
Preposition : P followed by a number.            
Name :        M followed by a number.
Place Name  : L folloewd by a number.
Exclamation : S followed by a number.
Number      : a "#" for every digit you want your number to be

    There are no spaces between the code letter and  the  number. 
The  number is used to tag each noun,  verb,  etc.  so it may  be 
repeated when nescesary.  If you are still not sure what all this 
means, then examine some of the given examples.
   If you have any comments, ideas, donations or texts you have 
typed out on disk, then send them to :

Wacko Software
Willem Pijperstraat 63
1077XL Amsterdam
The Netherlands, Europe

DISCLAIMER : THE ABOVE PROGRAM ONLY CHOOSES THINGS AT RANDOM AND 
WAS NOT MEANT TO OFFEND ANYONE IN ANY WAY.

UPDATE 17-04-94
I now have an e-mail address. To e-mail me, write to
ae-a@minster.york.ac.uk  (expires June 1995)

This has been updated with STOS FIX 3 so it should work fine on STs
with tos > 2.06

Games I have made so far:
(Available by FTP on the Internet)

3d ski
Alienation
Line Crash
Mazewar ST
Pacmen
Video Games 1 v.0.5

I have also made:
The STOS Gamescomposer
The STOS Slideshow
STOS Re-writer

Collect them all.

