--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

                             WARRIORS OF LIGHT

                   A Dungeon Crawling Role Playing Adventure
                             for the Atari STE


                      (c) 2018-20 Wonderful Industries

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------


THE STORY SO FAR . . . 


In a strange future world, where a dimensional merge has led to the conjunction
of the realms of the real Earth and the realms of myth and magic, there exists 
a preceptory of warrior monks, armed with the power of magic as well as the 
skills of a warrior. They are the Warriors of Light, and you are one of them. 
You and your comrades in arms protect humanity from any of the evils that may 
exist. Gods, monsters, and men have all fallen to your order in the past.

Also inhabiting this mythic dimension are the Gorgons of Mars. A dying race,
they used to be feared in ages past for their cruelty and megalomania but of
late have been content to remain in isolation on the Red Planet ever since 
their queen, the tyrannical Medusa, was toppled millennia ago. More recently,
one of their number, a sorceress named Haephaestia, was exiled to Earth. You 
were concerned about this at first but it became clear that she intended to 
remain in exile in a fortress that used to be named, in one reality, Maeldune.
She stayed in her fortress, and all that would occasionally be seen of her or
her minions were occasional and regrettable "misunderstandings" between her 
insectoid retainers and the people of the outlying farmsteads near to Maeldune.

Then came the attack.

You were out of the Warriors' monastery meditating, as is the custom of that
Order at given times of the year, and the first you knew of it was a great 
pall of black and filthy smoke arising from the monastery. You hurried back to
it only to find that legions of insectoids, ophidians, and magically twisted 
beasts were laying waste to it. Worse still, eldritch sorcery crackled and how-
led all around as none other than Haephaestia herself cast terrible incantat-
ions that brought the very stones of the monastery crashing down around each
other. The brothers and sisters of the Warriors of Light sold their lives 
dearly but all were eventually slaughtered and forced to flee for their lives.
But to no avail, for Haephaestia had tracked down each one and personally tur-
ned them all to stone.

One survivor was left. She told you between coughing up blood that Haephaestia
was responsible for this, then expired.

With all you know destroyed, you scavenged what equipment remained in the ruins
of the monastery and made for Maeldune. Perhaps, just beyond hope, you might be
able to determine why an exiled Gorgon of Mars would have committed such a fell
deed. 

And now you stand on the threshold of Haephaestia's fortress itself. 

Good luck.

You will almost certainly need it.


LOADING AND INSTALLATION


Warriors of Light requires that you have an Atari STE, or are able to emulate
same. If you don't, you may want to consider rectifying this before going fur-
ther.

You will also need at least 4 MB of RAM in your machine. The game will let you 
run it if you have only 2 MB but you may end up running out of memory. Don't say 
that we didn't warn you. If you don't have 4 MB, you can get a set of 4 MB SIMMs
from Exxos at www.exxoshost.co.uk.

It also must be an STE. The game makes extensive use of STE hardware including
the blitter and the DMA stereo sound interface. For maximum enjoyment, we recom-
mend that you connect up a pair of stereo speakers to the back of your STE. If
you don't have these and are just using a monitor, it will function but it will
not sound at all as nice. Furthermore, we use the stereo sound to allow you to 
hear where things are coming from within the game world for extra immersion.

We also recommend the use of a hard disk or equivalent. This is playable from
your floppy drive but load times will be longer and you will have to swap disks
more.

Assuming you meet the above requirements, carry out the following:

  1. Insert disk 1 into drive A of your STE and boot it up as normal. Assuming
     that you have set drive A as your boot drive, the game will boot. If not,
     you should navigate on the desktop to A:\AUTO\WOLBOOT.PRG and run that.

  2. The game will show a very nice splash image while it works out whether or
     not you have a hard drive. If you do, it will give you the option to press
     F1 to install to the hard drive or F2 to just carry on as normal. If not,
     it will crack straight on with loading the rest of the game.

  3. If you choose to install to a hard drive, it will run the installation app.
     Enter into it the drive and directory to install into. Once it is done, it 
     will return you to the desktop. From there you can run WOL.TOS from where 
     you installed the game.

The disks have no copy protection on them so it is completely fine if you make a
backup copy of them. In fact we encourage you to do so and store your originals 
in a safe place. If you have a Gotek or other floppy emulator we encourage you 
to use that rather than floppies. Nor will you be required to enter word n of 
line x in this instruction file at arbitrary places throughout the game. DRM is
for cucks.


MAIN MENU


Once you load the game and have enjoyed enough of the lovely intro music that 
Jon put together in Quartet while drunk one evening after having seen The Macc
Lads, a number of options should spring to your attention. They are:

  BEGIN - begins the game. You will be asked if you want to load a saved game
  here. If you do, you should select Yes or No and if yes, insert your save 
  disk or declare which drive contains your saved games. If not, you will start
  a new game.

  INTRO - Shows the very nice animated intro which we've put together just for
  you.

  SETTINGS - Allows you to reconfigure the keyboard controls and decide how much
  or how little in terms of mouse controls you want to be visible. You can also
  change some gameplay settings, such as combat difficulty (choose from Casual,
  Normal, Tough, or Masochistic), auto save on level change (choose from On or
  Off), and automap (choose from Real Adventurer or Quiche Eater).

  Please note that you can't change difficulty settings mid-game. If you lower
  yourself to the quiche-eating realms of automap users, you are stuck fast in
  your ignominy. 

  CREDITS - Shows a scroller telling you all about the cavalcade of aged autists 
  who are nuts enough to scratch-build a full Atari STE game thirty years after 
  the demise of said system.

  EXIT - Unceremoniously deposits you back on to the desktop.


CREATING YOUR CHARACTER


If you start a new game you will find yourself looking at a screen called "HERO"
which invites you to choose your name (up to 13 characters), gender (male, fem-
ale, or attack helicopter), your portrait (of a selection of 6 of each gender), 
and, of course, your stats. You start with 50 in each of Strength, Dexterity,
Intelligence, Stamina, and Resolve. You can also spread up to 44 additional poi-
nts however you think fit between them, and even take points off of one stat to 
add on to another. However you cannot have less than 20 in any stat or more than
80. There are, though magical items through the game which CAN bring your stats 
in excess of these limits so keep your eyes open.

Name, gender, and portrait are purely aesthetic. No -4 STR here.

Once you have done you will hit PLAY at the bottom to commence the game.


HOW TO PLAY


Eventually you should find yourself in game one way or another.

The interface is fairly self explanatory. We've kept it as uncluttered as possi-
ble because we want you to feel part of the game world rather than a pawn in some
sort of third rate role playing game. However here is a guide as some parts are 
more intuitive than others.

  Arrow icons or W, A, S, D, Q, E - Move around.

  Left click on the dungeon view - Pick something up, read a sign, fiddle with a
  switch or a chest or a door. If you click on an object, the mouse pointer will
  become an icon showing that object. From here you can click the floor to put 
  it down or the middle of the view to throw it. 

  Left click on portrait or space - Opens the inventory. Does NOT pause the game.

  Left click on the green box in top left - Opens the pause menu.

  Right click on view - Attack whatever's ahead with the weapon inright hand.

  Right click on portrait or enter - Opens spell menu. Does NOT pause the game.

  1-9 on keyboard - Cast the spell assigned to that key assuming enough mana.

  Right click with object in hand - If the object can be used, this uses it. A 
  prompt saying "Right click to [action]" should appear when it is in hand.

  R, F - Uses the items in those quick slots. Make use of these. Attempting to 
  rummage in your pack while a fire-breathing Petrox is coming for you is a fai-
  rly good recipe for adventurer flambe.

At the bottom of the screen is a text bar. This usually shows what is in hand,
but it also can show messages such as damage taken or dealt, warnings about poi-
son or other status effects, and the text of signs or similar. 

That's about everything really. If you have played Dungeon Master you should be
able to get the hang of this fairly quickly.


STAYING ALIVE


The red bar next to the portrait is your hit points as a proportion of your max.
The blue bar is the same for your mana. The exact figures of HP and MP can be
found in your inventory. MP will regenerate over time. HP will regenerate over
time also, but more slowly.

Also in the inventory screen can be found your current percentage of your fulln-
ess of food. You can find a variety of foods in the dungeon, some of which are
more satiating than others. So long as you keep this above zero, you should be
fine, though the game will warn you in the text bar at the bottom once you get 
to 25% fullness.

If you reach 0% food you will not be able to regenerate HP or MP. Also all hea-
ling of a magical nature will only be 50% effective. Starvation is such an ugly
way to go.

If you reach 0% HP, you will die. Once this happens you can either restart, re-
load, or quit. This should be self explanatory. 


LEGENDARY TREASURES


Haephaestia is an old and wily gorgon and over the centuries has amassed quite 
a few artefacts and items of legendry. Often these can do things that defy the
logic of the game or the laws of physics or even something totally unprecedent-
ed. If you find these you should keep them safely but be careful, they can all
the same hurt you as well if mishandled.

	Chakram of Dysnomia		Chaotic Grimoire
	Sceptre of Kingly Might		Robe of the Insane Sorceress
	Nine-metalled Cudgel		Mask of Anarchy
	Hammer of Justice		Temporal Disruption Staff
	Seven-League Boots		Champion's Girdle	


CREATURES YOU MAY ENCOUNTER


You will encounter quite a lot of unpleasant monsters on your journey, most of
which will probably attempt to kill you at some point. A few of them are detail-
ed below.

  Anacobra	Giant sized venomous snake. Territorial in nature.

  Baelon	A large, horned, reptilian beast with excessively sized teeth
		and a keen sense of smell. Deceptively fast and stealthy.

  Cave Moth	Giant insect used for scouting and guarding purposes. 

  Drone		Techno-magickal floating construct used for monitoring purposes.

  Hollower	One of Haephaestia's sicker techno-magickal creations, this is
		a swarm of nanomachines given life by the enslaved but still
		conscious souls of sentient beings. Extremely resistant to non-
		magical attacks.

  Insectoid	Mercenary soldier ants from the lunar colonies. Weak but often
		attack in well disciplined ranks and swarm their foes.

  Keraunosaur	Armoured dinosaur cloned back to life and imbued with lightning
		magic. Dangerous both in melee and at range, its only real weak-
		ness is that it is slow and extremely stupid.

  Manticore	Feral hybrid of legendry. Fast and vicious. Enjoys surprising 
		and killing its prey.

  Megapede	Excessively sized millipede that scuttles along ceilings. Used to
		keep dungeons clear of pests such as vermin and adventurers.

  Naga		Evil multi-headed humanoid/ophidian hybrid which is capable of
		both melee combat and spellcasting.

  Petrox	Fire-spouting crocodilian hybrid. Almost entirely immune to all
		magical damage.

  Rhaptodon	Bottom-feeding scavenger that dwells underground. Cowardly but
		vicious when cornered.

  Triffid	Carnivorous plant with whip-like barbed stinger. Very slow but
		not unintelligent, and has attacks capable of blinding.

  Yale		Magickal hybrid beast based on the antelope with tusks, razor-like
		horns, and a thirst for flesh. Usually runs if caught alone but
		attacks in packs.

This is, of course, not all of the creatures you may encounter in the game. After
all, isn't it more fun to find things out for yourself?  
	

SOME HINTS ON PLAY


We believe that the proof of the pudding is in the eating and it is far more fun
for you to discover things as you go along. However, here are some pointers.

  - Enemies have different strengths and weaknesses. Learn them.

  - Not all objects are treasure, or even useful. Some are downright dangerous.
    It is a really bad idea to hurl the Chakram of Dysnomia in a confined space.

  - Some enemies will respawn but often there is a way of preventing or mitigat-
    ing respawns. Have a look around carefully.

  - It's not always bad to fall down a pit. 

  - Always keep moving. Some enemies will actively surround or corner you.

  - Keep your ears open. Some enemies love to attack from behind.

  - Scrolls and books can often contain useful clues and hints but they may not
    be entirely obvious from the outset.

  - Generally speaking, larger enemies more more slowly, but not always. The 
    Baelon is a notable exception to this.

  - Save early, save often. You might think yourself indestructible having beat
    your way through six levels this session, only to die horribly when you
    least expect it. Once you get into Haephaestia's pyramid, every step spells
    danger.


WHO MADE THIS ANYWAY?


Warriors of Light started life in 2018 when Jon S. Stock was schlepping around
in his STE emulator and drew a single vertical line about two thirds of the way
down the screen. This then became the interface to the game. With this in mind,
he opened up his faithful STOS disk and began to code feverishly in between his
binge-watching of Xena, Warrior Princess and Breaking Bad. The excuse plot came
together out of a number of heavy metal fuelled dreams. Having shown his work
to the STOS Coders group on Facebook, he met a very good Kiwi artist called 
Michael Keenleyside who did most of the graphics over the next couple of years.
He also met a Yorkshire Tyke named Tom Walker who had autodidacted himself some 
68000 assembler and written a prize-winning demo called I've Quit. These three
superannuated nerds then proceeded to generate the, well, acceptable, game you
see before you. 

Some credit also goes to one Neil Halliday who produced the sound and music sys-
tem primarily for his own game (Monster Manor, a roguelike based on the old Uni-
versal Horror franchise) but which he was kind enough to let us loose on. Neil
also hosts the STOS Coders forum at stoscoders.com where you might be able to 
find us on a good day. Or even a bad day.

Thanks also to Chris Swinson for the Exxos store and for helping us all keep our
STs going many years out of warranty. 

In terms of stylistic influences, Warriors of Light was predominantly influenced
by classic ST dungeon crawlers such as Eye of the Beholder and Captive and of 
course, the mighty Dungeon Master. The idea of a single-character equipped with 
weapons and magic as well as the "late to the party" conceit of battling through
a set of dungeons while the big bad taunts you came from both Anvil of Dawn
and System Shock on the PC.

In fact, Haephaestia looks more than a little bit like SHODAN, wouldn't you say?

One of the things we really wanted to avoid in making this game was allowing the
player an overreliance on the "combat waltz" or "circle dance" and so the idea
of multiple types of enemy behaviour was born. Hopefully you might be surprised
at some of the various ways that monsters will engage you. We also wanted not to
have things like monster closets and other overdone things like that. There are
some, though. After all a crawler isn't a crawler until you've grabbed obvious
keys and released something horrific into your immediate vicinity. 

If you liked Warriors of Light, you are encouraged to send copies to all and
sundry. There isn't as much of a homebrew scene for the ST as there is for the
Speccy or some other home computers and we really want to remedy that. Just make
sure that you don't try to claim credit for it. If you do, we might just have to
slip a manticore into your bedroom late at night. After having starved it for a 
few weeks, that is. 

(We did mention that Carole Baskin was our manticore tamer, right? Well then.)

If you really liked it, then please "Toss A Coin To Your Developers" as follows:

     PayPal:       xxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxx@xxxxxxxxxx.xxx
     BTC:          12345t6y7y8902
     
