              TAKE NOTE PRINTING/PROGRAMMERS' CALCULATOR v1.0
                     Copyright 1990, Take Note Software 


          If you are at all familiar with calculators you should have 
     no trouble with this program.  The program may be used as an 
     accessory or as a Gem program (with the extender renamed from 
     ".ACC" to ".PRG").  It has the ability to output to a printer after 
     each entry/calculation or store these and print them out as a 
     group.
          The calculator uses its own window and as such may be dragged 
     around the screen to get it out of the way.  It is closed or 
     removed from operation the same manner as any Gem window.  The 
     program is rather memory hungry (using about 100k) because of the 
     tape function.


                                  TAPE BOX


          The box to the right of the calculator is the tape box
     which can display a history of 18 operations at a time and hold 
     999 total.  As you exceed the number of displayable operations you 
     will see the scroll bar at the right of the window reconfigure.  
     You may use the scroll bar to display any portion of the "tape".
          There are five different buttons which affect the tape box.  

               TAPE OFF - Turn the tape box off.
               DEC      - See below.
               PRINT    - Print the entire tape.
               CLEAR    - Clear the entire tape
               SPACE    - Insert a blank line in the tape box.


                               NUMBER FORMATS


          There are 6 possible formats that you can display numbers in.  

               "DEC" decimal, or base 10
               "$"   decimal, base 10 but in dollars and cents format
                     which includes truncating to the second decimal 
                     place.
               "HEX" hexadecimal, or base 16
               "OCT" octal, or base 8
               "BIN" binary or base 2
               "RT"  Running total.  This is available only in the 
                     second display.

          There are boxes to the right of all three display areas which 
     control the format of numbers used within.  All three will read 
     "DEC" the first time you use the calculator.  You may cycle 
     through the various formats by clicking on these boxes.


                            OPERATORS/FUNCTIONS


          Besides the standard +,-./,*,^ there are operators and 
     functions that programmers often use as described briefly below. 
     These are found to the left of the calculator below the display 
     boxes.

          Below are logical operators which act on a pair of numbers 
     bit wise.  
          
          AND - Logical AND.
          NOT - Logical AND NOT.
          OR  - Logical OR.
          XOR - Logical XOR.

          Next are the shift and roll functions.  They take a number 
     and shift or roll bits to the left or right.  They can operate 
     using either a "Long" word (32 bits), a "Word" (16 bits) or a 
     "Byte" (8 bits) (see below).  The largest valid argument is 
     32.  Larger numbers are treated as argument MOD 32.  See the next
     entry.

          SHR - Shift bits right.
          SHL - Shift bits left.
          ROR - Roll bits right.
          ROL - Roll bits left.


          LONG -  The button named "Long" does not initiate an
                  operation but controls the number of bits used by
                  the shift and roll functions.  You can change between
                  the three lengths described above by clicking on
                  this box.

          There are two functions for changing individual bits (0 to 
     31) of a number.  If you enter an argument greater than 32 the 
     result will reflect the argument MOD 32, e.g., 4 BSET 33 gives the 
     same result as 4 BSET 1.  See "MOD" below.

          BSET - Set a bit to ON.
          BCLR - Set a bit to OFF.

          The following functions require no argument and operate 
     immediately upon the current number, displaying the result.

          SIN  - The sine of a number.
          COS  - The cosine of a number.
          TAN  - The tangent of a number.
          ATAN - The arc tangent of a number.
          ASIN - The arc sine of a number.
          ACOS - The arc cosine of a number.
          DEG  - Converts radians to degrees.
          RAD  - Converts degrees to radians.
          SQR  - The square root of a number.
          LOG  - The logarithm of x base e.
          EXP  - The xth power to the base of a number.

          These next functions either round or return a portion of the 
     current number.  They also require no argument.

          TRUN - Truncate, returning only the whole portion of a
                 number.  This is not rounding as TRUN(1.51)=1 where
                 ROUN(1.51)=2.

          FRAC - Returns only the fractional portion of a number. e.g. 
                 FRAC(1.75)=.75

          ROUN - Rounds the current number.

          MOD -  The last function was added at the last minute and
                 returns the modulus or remainder of an integer
                 division.  e.g 10 MOD 3=1 or the remainder of 10
                 divided by 3=1.  This function returns only whole
                 numbers and all input will be rounded.


                                    SEND


          To the left of the calculator is a button called "SEND". If 
     this is selected when you close the calculator, the number shown 
     in the top display box will be transmitted as a series of 
     keystrokes.  Any application which is monitoring the keyboard 
     should receive it.  This can be handy for sending the results of 
     a calculation to your word processor.  The sent string is padded 
     on both ends with a space.


                                  PRINTER


          You may choose to have the calculator print out operations 
     and numbers immediately by clicking on the button that is labeled 
     "Printer".  Normally all output will be to the right side of the 
     paper but if you want to print on narrower paper or are more 
     comfortable with the calculations to the left, select the button 
     named "L. Just.".  This selection will also affect the tape box 
     print-out.


                                 KEYSTROKES


          All keys on the numeric keypad and regular keyboard follow 
     their on-screen graphic equivalent.  Additional keystrokes are;

          F1       - Cycle through the main display box number formats.
          F2       - Cycle through the translation display formats.
          F3       - Cycle through the tape box formats.
          Undo     - CE (Clear entry).
          Clr/Home - CA (Clear all).
          ")" on the numeric keypad is the equivalent of "^".

          "/" on the keyboard is the equivalent of the on-screen "ö".  
          "ö" (Ascii code 246) is also sent to the printer.  This
     character will print as an italic "v" if you're printer is using
     the Epson italic character set but is present in most other
     standard character sets.


                                 DISCLAIMER

          This program has been tested quite a bit but Take Note 
     Software accepts no liability for damage from its' use or misuse 
     and makes no claims as to its suitability for any specific 
     purpose.  If you discover any bugs or have any suggestions to make 
     please feel free to contact us.  Please include this read me file 
     with the program if sharing it with others.
           This program has been released to the public domain 
     and is free.  Of course if you find it useful and want to send us 
     money (maybe 5$? ) we won't argue with you about it.  This is a 
     new concept in software distribution based on guilt called Share-
     your-money-with-us-if-you've-got-it-ware which shouldn't be taken
     too seriously.


                                              J.L.Jacobi
                                              Take Note Software
                                              285 Divisadero #3
                                              San Francisco, CA  94117
                                              (415)431-9495


          Take Note Software also publishes commercially, "Take Note",
     a musical ear/sight training program for the Atari ST and Amiga
     computers.  For further information write/call us at the above
     address/phone number.

                                REVISION LOG

     V1.1 - 01/06/91

     -    Large numbers (outside the range -2,147,483,648 to
     2,147,483,647) entered or translated to hex/octal/binary formats
     no longer crash the system however these numbers will be
     automatically displayed in decimal or floating point no matter
     what type translation is selected.

     -    There is now a choice to print to disk as well as the printer.
     The file saved is "TAPE####.ASC" where #### represents the number
     of the tape file.  The program checks to see if previous tape
     files are present and takes the first available number,  i.e., if
     "TAPE1.ASC" is found the file will be saved as "TAPE2.ASC".  The
     files are saved to the default directory (the directory booted to
     or that the program was run from).

     V1.11 - 02/01/91

          MOD bug fixed.

     V1.20 - 03/10/91

     -    The Hex number routine has been redone so that it will
     display larger numbers.  A memory function has now been added with
     four options:

                    MR - Recall a number from memory.
                    M+ - Add the current number to memory.
                    M- - Subtract the current number from memory.
                    MC - Clear memory.

     The corresponding keystrokes are;

                    ^CR/^ENTER/^=     MR
                    ^Clr/Home         MC
                    ^+                M+
                    ^-                M- (For some reason this does
                                         not work on a MEGA STe keypad)

          These functions occupy the buttons that used to contain the
     tape functions.  All print and tape functions have been moved to a
     dialog box which will appear whenever you click on either "Print"
     or "Tape".

     -    There is now a separate "Save" tape option which writes the
     current tape to disk instead of the program prompting you to "Print
     Where?" after you select the "Print" tape button.

     -    The bug that would cause the program to bomb if you hit more
     than 31 consecutive zeros after the decimal point has been fixed.

     -    Dollar format numbers now are displayed correctly when
     negative.

     -    There are now commas (well sort of) for decimal and dollar
     format numbers in the main and translation displays.

     -    The tape counter would reset even when you answered no to the
     alert asking if you wanted to clear the tape.  This really screwed
     things up.  It has been fixed.

     V1.25  04/17/91

     -    Attempting to perform bit operations on floating point
     numbers no longer crashes the system but generates a message
     instead.

     -    The "=" sign was being lightened instead of the decimal point
     in version 1.2 when switching to number formats other than decimal
     or $.  It's been fixed.

     -    The window now shrinks when the tape function is turned off and
     then expands again when turned on.  It boots with the tape
     function off to save memory and screen space.

     -    The calculator remembers its current screen position and
     is placed there the next time it is opened.

     -    The program now works in low rez although there is no tape
     function.  Formerly it would try to end itself (A GEM No-No! for
     accessories) and cause a mysterious hang-up (Mysterious because it
     wouldn't register itself in the menu) whenever you tried to run
     another program or switch resolutions.

     -    Although I don't have a TT to check out the new graphics
     modes the program should now behave properly with them.  If they
     don't please let me know.

     - C-Ops.  For programmers in C you may now have the SHR, SHL, AND,
     OR and XOR buttons appear as the C operators >>, <<, &, | and ^
     by selecting this option which appeards in the TAPE/PRINT dialog.


                                 USERS POLL

     PROPOSED Additions:

     -    The ability to change numbers on the tape and recalculate any
     affected results (this will probably slow things down a wee bit as
     items will have to be translated on the fly but should save quite a
     bit of space and add a lot of flexibility).

     -    The ability to load previously saved tapes.

     -    Time format (base 60).

          Please let me know what you think of these proposed changes
     or make your wish list known by Genie E-MAIL (address J.JACOBI)
     or writing to me at the address listed somewhere above.

