

DOCUMENTATION FOR "SEARCH PALETTE" (SRCH_PAL.BSC),  version 1.33.


     This  program  was written to  accompany  "PALETTE.BSC"  and 
"RES_PAL.BSC"  and is really just a Medium Resolution version  of 
the former; though a little more complex.
     Medium Resolution, under normal circumstances, only supports 
four  different  palette colours at any one  instant.  These  are 
traditionally white (0),  black (1),  red (2) and green  (3),  by 
default,  though it is a simple matter to alter the palette  such 
that  a different selection of four colours  is  available.  This 
means  that  many different colours may be used in  a  Med.  Res. 
program, as long as only four appear on the screen at once.
     Choosing suitable colours while programming in Med. Res. can 
be very tedious (in Low Res. "PALETTE.BSC" can be used to examine 
16 colours at once),  hence my need for a simple tool to  somehow 
display  a  selection  of useful  colours  and  their  respective 
parameter values.  As I normally find the standard 16 ST  Control 
Panel colours to be reasonably adequate,  they are the only  ones 
used  in  this program.  I may well write  a  more  sophisticated 
version, one day, to allow non-standard colours to be displayed.
     As  with  the two programs mentioned  above,  "SRCH-PAL"  is 
designed  to  occupy an otherwise unused segment ,  on  the  FAST 
BASIC desktop,  while a program is being written.  This makes  it 
possible to view the palette easily and jump back to the  desktop 
to resume programming.
     The  program  is designed such that it is easy  to  use  and 
simply  involves entering a number (from 0 to 15) to specify  the 
index of a palette colour;  the central portion of the screen  is 
then  filled  with  that  colour,  and  the  relevant  index  and 
parameter  values are displayed such that they may be  noted  for 
future  use.  Any entered index value is displayed at the  bottom 
right of the screen until the next value is entered;  this allows 
for  mistakes to be recognised.  The program is user friendly  in 
that  it shows an error message if a value other than 0 to 15  is 
input,  and allows colour selection to resume, following a single 
key-press.
     The  only  exception (I hope) to this is that  pressing  "Q" 
will reset the standard palette and return to the desktop, though 
an  alert box will appear such that the decision to quit  may  be 
cancelled  (the  command to "RUN" is issued and the  program  re-
starts).
     Basically,  the  program  works by  changing  the  parameter 
values following PALETTE 3, according to the entered index.
     Each PALETTE command is followed by a colour index and three 
parameter values;  the latter corresponding to the red, green and 
blue components of the colour represented.  Though each parameter 
may  hold a value from 0 to 1000,  in practice only 8  shades  of 
each  primary colour are available,  giving a total of  8*8*8=512 
different  colours.  The parameter values are given  by  N*1000/7 
where N is a whole number from 0 to 7;  eg. 6*1000/7=857 (rounded 
down).  By changing the parameter values for a given colour index 
the colour can be changed.

For example:    

     PALETTE 3,0,1000,0            represents green
     PALETTE 15,1000,1000,0        represents yellow

Only  PALETTE commands with indices 0 to 3 may be issued in  Med. 
Res;  hence  to display yellow one of the four  standard  colours 
must  be  replaced  by  yellow.  This is  done  by  altering  the 
parameter values accordingly.

eg.   PALETTE  3,1000,1000,0   will  change  the  palette  colour 
represented by index 3,  such that it displays yellow rather than 
green.

     "SEARCH  PALETTE"  can  therefore be  used  to  examine  the 
standard  palette  and obtain the parameter  values  for  desired 
colours.  These can then be used to alter one or more of the four 
standard Med. Res. colours while writing some new program.
     "SEARCH  PALETTE"  works simply by  changing  the  parameter 
values  for  index  3  to match those  that  specify  the  colour 
represented by an index entered manually.
      

     "SEARCH  PALETTE"  is  written in  "COMPUTER  CONCEPTS  FAST 
BASIC";  it  is  Public  Domain material and may  be  copied  and 
distributed in a non-profit-making manner.



     B. KING,   
     Wallsend-on-Tyne,
     England.
     Tel: Tyneside (091) 234 5369

     19th Sept. 1989.
