                           ---------------------
                           St-Keep & the FidoNet
                           ---------------------
                               By Brian Lane

                             Callahan's Place
                               (206)569-2911
                           FidoNet:  1:138/162.0



                             Updated 06/21/92

                               Introduction
                                -----------

     In this tutorial I am not going to try to explain all of the FidoNet
terms or the structure of it.  The BinkleyTerm documentation has a very
good glossary at the end of it.


     Your first step in setting things up should be to get the latest copy
of ST-Keep and get it running by itself for a couple of days, weeks, or
months.  This will familiarize you with your setup, and will save you the
trouble of debugging the BBS setup as well as binkleyterm.

     You should get the following files from my system:


  BTST301A.LZH               This is version 3.01 of BinkleyTerm
  BTUD302A.LZH               This is the v3.02a update to BinkleyTerm
  BTPACK05.LZH               This is a QBBS to BinkleyTerm converter
  MAKEBINK.LZH               Make POLLs and FILE requests for BTST
  PLST130.LZH                Parselist nodelist parser v3.0
  BERM100S.ARJ               Bermuda mail processor
  PCOMMAND..LZH              Command line interperter
  STKEEP.LZH                 ST-Keep BBS software

     You should have a fairly large harddisk to set things up.  I am
running on 2 45meg drives.  It doesn't matter which drive or even which
folders things are in, as long as the paths are set up correctly.  When
doing backups it is a Good Idea to at least put them in another partition,
or if you have 2 physically seperate drives, put them on the other drive.
This way if something mungs up your BBS partition, you can recover fairly
easily.


     The layout of my system is:


    Drive C:
    --------
   Misc. utilities
   Fidonet Echos in C:\ECHOS

    Drive D:
    --------
    Folder D:\BT\
ARC.TTP           For use in uncompressing FidoNet packets

LHARC.TTP         Used for backing up things.

AREAS.BBS         Points to the folders, filenames, and HUB for each of the
                  fidonet Echos.

IMPORT.TTP        Bermuda mail import program, converts your FidoNet
                  packets into messages.

PACK.TTP          Bermuda mail packer, converts messages to packets

SCAN.TTP          Bermuda Scans utility, looks for new mail to be

BERMUDA.CFG       Config file for Bermuda Mailer software, contains your
                  fidonet address, folder for outbound, and inbound mail,
                  and for netmail.

BERMUDA.RTE       Controls how netmail is sent, whether thru your HUB or
                  directly to the other system.

BT.TTP            This is BinkleyTerm

BINKLEY.CFG       Config file for BinkleyTerm

BINKLEY.EVT       Controls when events happen to BinkleyTerm, like when BBS
                  calls are allowed, mail out is allowed, net mail hour,
                  backups.

SPAWNBBS.BAT      This is what actually runs the BBS, passes baudrate info
                  to ST-Keep.

BTPACK.CFG        Config file for the BTPack program, points to outbound
                  folder.

BTPACK.TTP        This program converts packets in BT format to QBBS format
                  and visa versa.

BBS.BAT           The batch file that runs everything, including BT, your
                  bbs, mail recieved, backups, etc...

HANGUP.PRG        A small program to drop DTR for 1 second.

MAKEBINK.TTP      This utility creates polls, file requests, send files
                  using BT.  Not necessary for operation.

     Folder D:\STK\BIN

     This folder contains The FidoDoor programs and files.  Just uncompress
the fidodoor programs into this folder and follow the instructions in the
manual for setup for a Forem BBS.  ST-Keep will generate the DORINFO1.DEF
file to pass info to FidoDoor.

    To add fidoDoor to ST-Keep, add a door to the STK_DOOR.SYS file that
should look something like this:
2                                 <------ user level for access
FidoNet Message Bases             <------ your name for the door
D:\BT\BIN\FIDODOOR.TTP            <------ path to program
-D                                <------ Tell ST-Keep to create .DEF file
                                  <------ blank line!!(VERY IMPORTANT)

  Also, don't forget to change the total number of doors at the top of the
STK_DOOR.SYS file.

  In the enclosed AutoExec.BAT file I also have a fidodoor call that is
Handled by pressing F1.  This enters the door using my name(or your name)
as a local access.  To use FidoDoor from the local system you must do it
this way.

    There are several other Folders in the D:\BT\ folder that are
important.  The D:\BT\INB\ folder is where all inbound files and packets
end up for processing my the mailer software.  FileRequests and NodeDiffs
also end up here for manual processing.  You psths in BTST and Bermuda must
point to these locations.  The D:\BT\OTB\ folder is where all outbound
packets go, and where BT looks for things to send.

  My suggestin would be to just change the drive specifications that I have
included(make sure you get 'em all).  A checklist of all the folders is
also very helpful.

    The nodelist is in the D:\BT\NL\ folder, as well as PARSELST and its
config file.


    The best advice I can give is take things one piece at a time.   PRINT
all the documentation and at least skim it.  Getting the folders to point
in the right direction is very important.

    Find out who your local Net Coordinator is and get the local net's
application file, and any other helpfiles they have available.

    Most important of all:   HAVE FUN!  This is supposed to be a hobby,
and it will not all fall in place at once.  Keep a positive outlook and
ask for help often.


                    Locations of Paths and values to Change
                    ---------------------------------------
  AREAS.BBS :  Change the tagline at the begenning to your BBS name and
               phone number.
               Change the paths to point to your message base files as
               defined in BINKLEY.CFG and the FIDODOOR setup program.
               Once you have a HUB for echomail, change the 999s to the
               HUB's FidoNet address.

AUTOEXEC.BAT:  Change pollhub to the FidoNet address of your HUB.
               Change the other paths to reflect your setup.

BERMUDA.CFG :  Change the Address and Key statments to your FidoNet address
               once it has been assigned to you.
               NETFILE should point to the SAME thing as NETFILE in
               BINKLEY.CFG.
               NETMAIL points to the full path and filename(no extension) of
               your netmail message base.
               HOLD points to the outboud file area, the same as hold in
               BINKLEY.CFG
               STATUSLOG should point to your log folder, this will record
               everything that happens with Bermuda.
               SYSOP should be changed to your name.

BINKLEY.CFG :  For a highspeed modem(9600+) set baud to 19200 and enable
               the STLockBaud command.  This will keep the computer to modem
               speed set at 19200, allowing for faster transfer time.
               Modem init strings depend on what modem you are using.  I am
               using a Supra 14.4k FaxModem and that is what it is set up for.
               Refer to the Binkley user manual for more info on baudrates and
               their setup.
               Statuslog poins to the binkley logfile and its limit.
               System should be changed to your BBS name
               Sysop should be changed to your name
               Address should be changed to your FidoNet address when you get
               it.
               Netmail should point to where Netmail goes, this is used by
               BTCTL(which I don't use)
               NETFile is VERY important, this is where all incoming packets
               go before being processed by the mailer(Bermuda) and should
               be the same as the NETFILE in BERMUDA.CFG
               Hold should point to the area for outbound files.  This
               should be the same as HOLD in BERMUDA.CFG
               Nodelist points to the nodelist folder.
               
BTPACK.CFG  :  HOLD points to the same place as HOLD in BINKLEY.CFG and in
               BERMUDA.CFG
               START_BINKLEY points to BT.TTP

PARSELST.CFG:  Node should be changed to your FidoNet node number when you
               get it.
               If you have a 1meg machine Userlist should be commented out.
               This creates a sorted file of all the sysops and their
               addresses.  A 1meg machine doesnt have enough memory to sort
               all of these, and it should be commented out.



                                   --------
                                   ADDENDUM
                                   --------
                               by Rich Tietjens
                                   STarship
                                 (318)535-9684
                             FidoNet:  1:3817/14.0

Here is my step-by-step method of setting up FIDOnet with BTST and FIDOdoor
under ST-Keep:

(1) Once you have obtained all the archives (I would recommend getting the
latest Nodelist from a local BBS sysop - the uncompressed, unarced Nodelist is
over 1.3 megs in size!), you can unarc everything into the appropriate folders.
Be sure to "Include Full Paths" while unarcing, it will save time later.

In order to get set up with FIDOdoor, I had to move some things around, because
I have one of my physical drives partitioned into 10 megabyte logical drives;
the Nodelist in all its varied incarnations requires nearly half of that!
Therefore, I came up with the following folder structure (contents of the
folders are the same as Brian's system):

C:\STKEEP3                        ; ST-Keep's home

D:\STKEEP3                        ; Doors for ST-Keep

E:\STK_BAK                        ; I recommend you put the two backup folders
F:\STK_BAK1                       ; on two seperate logical (or physical!)
                                  ; drives, in case a crash kills one of them.

J:\MSG                            ; Echomail message bases (e.g., "ATARI_ST)
J:\NETMAIL                        ; Netmail messages ("FMAIL")
J:\DOWNLOAD                       ; Where Binkley puts downloaded files

K:\BT                             ; Main directory for Binkley ST
K:\FD                             ; FIDOdoor's home

The folder containing Binkley (BTST) also contains Tomshell, Bermuda, Pack,
Import, etcetera, and AREAS.BBS.  Subdirectories include the Nodelist and
Parselist ST, Inbound mail, Outbound mail, Net mail (packed), and so forth, as
outlined in Brian's text and the FIDOdoor docs.  You also need to copy ARC.TTP,
LHARC.TTP (which I call LZH201K.TTP), STZIP.TTP, and UNARJ.TTP into the BT
folder.

(2) Print and read all the documents and the various config files.  This will
take a considerable amount of time, so don't rush it.  Don't worry if you don't
immediately understand something, it will probably lie dormant in your mind
until the situation comes up, and then you can at least start searching the
docs intelligently, instead of randomly.

(3) Edit your AREAS.BBS and all the various config files as explained in their
internal comments, their documents, and Brian's commentary above.  Also edit
BBS.BAT (or TOMSHELL.TOM if you want it to run automatically whenever
TOMSHELL.TTP is run) to point to the correct paths for your particular setup.
If you aren't very comfortable with MS-DOS style paths, it would be advisable
to have a knowledgable friend sit in and kibitz while you're doing all the
editing.  Double or triple-check all your paths - I spent 3 whole days trying
to debug my system, when the only thing wrong was a missing colon in my
BINKLEY.CFG!

I have included a sample batch file in this archive to use with Tomshell,
Binkleyterm ST, and ST-Keep.  You will need to edit the paths to point to the
right drives and folders for your particular system, but otherwise very little
change should be required.  The file called "BBS.BAT" is uncommented, while
"SAMPLE.BAT" is replete with commentary to help you figure out what the file is
doing.  I suggest you print out "SAMPLE.BAT" and keep it handy while you edit
BBS.BAT.  As noted in the sample, it is best to run the batch files without
comments in them.  Also, you will find TOMSHELL.TOM, which is equivalent to the
MS-DOS AUTOEXEC.BAT; TOMSHELL.TOS (or .TTP) will run TOMSHELL.TOM
automatically as soon as you run the TOS.

(4) Run FDSYSGEN and set up your message bases. If you have the FIDOdoor docs
handy, that should be fairly easy.  When you finish, print out your system
information, then exit and save.

(5) Unarc your Nodelist. Start the coffee maker or call out for a case of Jolt
Cola.

One thing nobody ever seems to mention when you are trying to set up
Binkleyterm is that the node number in all your configuration files must
already be in the Nodelist when you parse it.  Since, obviously, you don't have
a node number yet, you should use the dummy node number of 1:999/9999 until you
get everything working, and are issued a real node number from your local net.
Then, you'll need to be sure you get added to the Nodediff.

Alternately, if your net coordinator will give you a number, by following the
same format as the other nodes on your private net, use a text editor to add
yourself to the private net node list.  Use the Mylist command in the
PARSELST.CFG file so that PVTNET.LST (or the equivalent file for your local
net) is included in the parse.  Then change all your config files to reflect
the new node number.

Finally, you can parse or re-parse the nodelist and go on-line! Start PARSLST
and go suck down some caffiene, this could take a while, depending on which
lists you decide you need. If you are using a Private Net List (such as my
PVTNET.LST), be sure to inlude the Region line in it (copy it from the raw
Nodelist) or your node will end up in Region 1. This is fine if you happen to
be in Region 1, but I'm in Region 19, so I ended up reparsing the list many,
many times.  BTW, creating the UserList will make life simpler for you when
entering Netmail later on - FIDOdoor will look up the correct address for you,
if you're sending to a FIDO sysop (nice touch, Bryan Hall)!  If you have one
available, I recommend parsing the list on a Mega STe or TT at the highest
available speed - it took less than 25 minutes on my MSTe at 16MHz, cache on,
to create every possible list, but over an hour on the 8MHz 520 ST, even though
it has 4 megs of RAM versus only 2 megs on the MSTe.

One thing that is very important is that Fidodoor will get really stinky about
that blank line in the STK_DOOR.SYS file - if it isn't blank, all sorts of odd
things will happen, none of them good!

STarship is set up on a 44 meg Syquest cartridge hard drive, and an 85 meg
Seagate. We'll be adding another 45 meg drive at the end of July so we can
expand our message bases.

Good luck! Hope to see you on Fidonet soon!
