   Bacardi, yeah! We love it! It is definitely the best stuff except 
girls, especially dutch girls. You won't believe it but we (we who 
wrote this shit, Chris and Nick of The Very Famous Ultimate Rich and 
Beautiful, multimulus and shifted left Garlic Eaters) can't remember 
that we have seen one ugly girl here since we are here. So, now we 
will tell you about our last night which we spent in a really great 
disco near Oss. The name was ' Goldfinger ' and we can tell you that 
it was very good and very, very loud. Hey, just at the moment Dizzy 
of Tool 8 interrupted my writing coz he stepped into the room with 
another nice girl from Oss. I think it's the one we fucked yesterday 
in the disco in the toilette. Perhaps I should describe her a bit... 
she has long blond hairs like all the others here and wonderful green 
( 040 in hex... ) eyes not to forget the wonderful body. I would 
estimate that her very good balls have a width of about wonderful 89 
cm. I think that we will try it this evening a second time but we 
first have to buy some more of this plastic stuff... you know what I 
mean... If Acco of The Ultimate Garlic Eaters would read this text he 
would say, as always, ' Eh, eh, warte mal....' and also he would say 
that me and Nick are sexsists. Perhaps you could understand this 
better if you know that his girlfriend has left for a year to London 
and so he's totally pissed off.... So, we now will write something 
about Fury (ex Replicants, now Legacy (two guys group)). He's a very 
good coder who made it possible to make people believe that they have 
an STE in times when the computer wasn't already released... wait 
Fury is just telling me that at this time he had a STE with four 
megabyte and he was asked by atari to make a demo for the ste. So, I 
don't care... let me say ..... the bottle is nearly finished... Now 
Spaz will write some nice words .... I hope that your spleen is 
ripped in two by a rabbid dog who pisses on your head and the throw 
the remains of your coarpse into a glowing bag of pus that is oozing 
with maggots and rotting foetuases..........      .......and have a 
happy christmas!!!  Did you know that Fury's girlfriend left him coz 
he had lotsa problems with dandruff... wait quotation Spaz ' you 
can't fuck a mouse and you can't fuck lotsa mice coz they split! ' 
Don't worry this was only a lesson to show you how to use plurals. 
Barr Barr black sheep, have you any wool, yes sir yes sir three bags 
full. One for the master and one for the dame, and one for the little 
boy who lives down a drain......   hey quotation Spaz ' are you hot? 
' and ' have you big tits? ' and ' I'm a good fucker! '   .... we 
come back to the real world.... hey, Fury and Tyrem of the 
respectables who are sitting next to us and writing the scrolltext in 
the upper border just had and virus which wrote only the letters ' 
thor ' on the screen and after a while their computer fucked off... 
now they have to rewrite their shit again... now we have already 44 
lines of file length more than them.... so, this is another proove 
that we are the best and unbeatable, famous and cool, rich and 
beautiful Garlic Eaters who can't be beaten up coz they are to small 
to be beaten up.... but we can tell you how to fuck a girl in a 
really hard way that makes her think that she's flying to heaven. 
First, you have to put on your most lovely face that you ever found 
in your mirror, then she will automatically smelt away like all the 
girls like to do, now if you reached this level of the game you'll 
sure to win the fight. Yes, it is a real fight coz you have to use 
all your stomach muscles to fuck her. If she starts to scream and 
shout very loudly (like the girl yesterday...) then she will come 
nearer to extasy. Don't stop know, otherwise you'll never get again a 
chance to fuck her again because she will think that you are a lamer, 
like all the other ....lamers here... you have to know that they have 
their own seperate room and in this room they are all alone fucking. 
'Lifes a bitch and then you marry one!' Manikin quote. What a fucking 
silly scrolltext it can only be written by the infinitely silly Chris 
of The Garlic Eaters. The guy is missing quite a large number of 
brain cells I think!!!! ...Yes he's not wrong at all but remember his 
nicknames for 'Manikin' like 'Wanker King' or 'Manikindisch' or 
especially 'Many came (in his ass !!!!)' ... oh, you have to know 
that richard karsmakers is interested in including this scrolltext 
into the new ST-News which will be published soon. This will be a new 
serie called 'How to become a Lust boy !' Yeah, you have to know that 
yesterday when we were in the disco some dutch guys asked us if we 
would like to have some shit and of course we said yes coz we liked 
to try it but they gave us a Mindbomb.... oh, another quotation of 
Tyrem of The respectables... 'Richard is only interested to get your 
scrolltext coz he's fed up with using mirinda bottles for sex instead 
of some nice pussies of some dutch girls....'       so here come the 
credits for this wonderful and unnickable screen..... coding  The 
ultimate Fate of ulm  ..... Graphics from Dizzy of TOol 8 (the girl) 
and hawkmoon (the unbeatable ULm logo with the best marmour effect 
the blue adept has ever seen....)     musax by 'give him a chance 
....'     upper scrolltext by tyrem and small contributions from 
fury......... so let's wrap ....................   
