                                                                   Page 1







     SSSSS CCCCC RRRR  EEEEE EEEEE N    N       DDDD  RRRR   AAA  W   W
     S     C     R   R E     E     NN   N       D   D R   R A   A W W W
     SSSSS C     RRRR  EEE   EEE   N N  N ----- D   D RRRR  AAAAA W W W
         S C     R  R  E     E     N  N N       D   D R  R  A   A W W W
     SSSSS CCCCC R  RR EEEEE EEEEE N   NN       DDDD  R  RR A   A  WWW  

                               Version 1.0

                   Copyright 1992  by Scott R. Garrigus
                           All Rights Reserved.


                            Scott R. Garrigus
                           c/o S.R.G. Software
                             130 Goodhue Road
                             Derry, NH  03038

                            GEnie: S.GARRIGUS
                              PAN: GARRIGUS


                     This software is provided as-is.
              There are no warranties, expressed or implied.

     S.R.G. SOFTWARE DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES RELATING TO THIS SOFT-
      WARE, WHETHER EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
       ANY IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A
      PARTICULAR PURPOSE, AND ALL SUCH WARRANTIES ARE EXPRESSLY AND
       SPECIFICALLY DISCLAIMED.  NEITHER S.R.G. SOFTWARE NOR ANYONE
        ELSE WHO HAS BEEN INVOLVED IN THE CREATION, PRODUCTION, OR
     DELIVERY OF THIS SOFTWARE SHALL BE LIABLE FOR ANY INDIRECT, CON-
       SEQUENTIAL, OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR
     INABILITY TO USE SUCH SOFTWARE EVEN IF S.R.G. SOFTWARE HAS BEEN
       ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES OR CLAIMS.  IN NO
       EVENT SHALL S.R.G. SOFTWARE'S LIABILITY FOR ANY DAMAGES EVER
        EXCEED THE PRICE PAID FOR THE LICENSE TO USE THE SOFTWARE,
       REGARDLESS OF THE FORM OF CLAIM.  THE PERSON USING THE SOFT-
       WARE BEARS ALL RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
                                SOFTWARE.






 
                                                                   Page 2


     Some states do not allow the exclusion of the limit of liability  for 
consequential or incidental damages, so the above limitation may not apply 
to you.
     This  agreement  shall be governed by the laws of the  State  of  New 
Hampshire  and  shall  inure to the benefit of  S.R.G.  Software  and  any 
successors,  administrators,  heirs and assigns.  Any action or proceeding 
brought  by  either party against the other arising out of or  related  to 
this  agreement  shall  be brought only in a STATE  or  FEDERAL  COURT  of 
competent jurisdiction located in Rockingham County,  New Hampshire.   The 
parties hereby consent to in personam jurisdiction of said courts.





                                SHAREWARE

This program is Shareware.   It may be distributed freely as long as it is 
unaltered  in any way and includes this documentation.   If you find  this 
program useful please send a check or money order (drawn on a US bank) for 
$15 made out to Scott R. Garrigus to:

                            Scott R. Garrigus
                           c/o S.R.G. Software
                             130 Goodhue Road
                             Derry, NH  03038


                                THANKYOU!






















 
                                                                   Page 3


                            Table Of Contents
                            -----------------

INTRODUCTION   ....................................    5

GETTING STARTED     ...............................    6
  About this Manual ...............................    6
  Loading Screen-Draw    ..........................    7

THE BASICS     ....................................    8
  The Menu Screen   ...............................    8
  Keys and Keystrokes    ..........................    9
  Screens and Mouse Control   .....................    9
  Colors  .........................................    10
  Fill Patterns     ...............................    10
  Leaving Screen-Draw    ..........................    10

THE DRAWING COMMANDS     ..........................    11
  Plot    .........................................    11
  Line    .........................................    11
  Box     .........................................    12
  PBox    .........................................    12
  RBox    .........................................    13
  PRBox   .........................................    13
  Circle  .........................................    14
  PCircle .........................................    14
  Ellipse .........................................    15
  PEllipse     ....................................    15
  Fill    .........................................    16
  Text    .........................................    16
  Erase Object ....................................    17

THE MENU BAR   ....................................    17
  File    .........................................    17
     Load .........................................    17
     Save .........................................    18
     Save As .LST   ...............................    18
     Quit .........................................    18
  Line    .........................................    19
  Text    .........................................    19
  GMode   .........................................    19
  Options .........................................    20








 
                                                                   Page 4














                    This page left blank intentionaly.





































 
INTRODUCTION                                                       Page 5


Screen-Draw is a drawing utility for programmers using GFA-Basic.  With it 
you  can draw pictures on the screen using the mouse and then  later  have 
your picture converted into the GFA-Basic graphics commands such as  PLOT, 
LINE,  etc.  and save them in the .LST file format for inclusion into your 
own programs.   Screen-Draw currently supports the ST and STE and works in 
all three resolution modes.  Screen-Draw works with one or two floppy disk 
drives, RAMdisks and hard disk drives.

Before  you use Screen-Draw,  you should read your ST/STE manual to  learn 
how to use menus,  load programs,  make copies,  and use all of the  other 
basic features of the machine.

In  order for you to be able to easily find the information  you  need,  I 
have included a Table of Contents and an Index in this manual.   In  order 
to find the exact page you need just set your file viewer to find Page xx, 
xx being the page number.  This should take you to the top of the page you 
need to find.

































 
GETTING STARTED                                                    Page 6
  About This Manual


While  every attempt has been made to provide you with a complete  manual, 
things often change at the last minute.   If you happen to find a file  on 
the master disk called README.1ST,  please do exactly that.  Read or print 
out this file before you start reading any more of this manual.

This  manual  is organized in such a manner as to let you get  started  as 
soon as possible.  The first few chapters introduce you to Screen-Draw and 
it's  basic  features.   From there the manual is basically  a  reference, 
though  you should read it to gain a full understanding of all of  Screen-
Draw's features.  Both a Table of Contents and an Index have been provided 
to help you find exactly what you need to know as fast as possible.






































 
  Loading Screen-Draw                                              Page 7



The only file needed to run Screen-Draw is the actual program file itself.  
There are no resource files or support files.   All you need do is double-
click on SCRNDRAW.PRG and Screen-Draw will run.   Screen-Draw is  designed 
to work in all three screen resolutions so it doesn't matter which one you 
start it from.   Though if you want to work in a resolution other than the 
one you're in,  you'll have to set that resolution before running  Screen-
Draw.  

Hard  disk users can run Screen-Draw from any drive or within a folder  on 
any drive, and save to any drive or folder.







































 
THE BASICS                                                         Page 8
  The Menu Screen



Looking  at the menu screen you'll see four main sections.   First is  the 
menu  bar across the top of the screen.   This holds the selections  '', 
'File',  'Line',  'Text', 'GMode', and 'Options'.  Below that is the color 
palette  which displays the available colors in the current resolution  -- 
16 in Low Res.,  4 in Medium Res., and 2 in High Res.  Next to that is the 
Setcolor button which calls up the setcolor dialog to allow you to  change 
the colors of the available color registers.   Below this are the last two 
sections.   On  the left are the drawing command buttons and on the  right 
are the fill selection buttons.

By  moving  the  mouse cursor onto one of  the  available  buttons  (color 
button,  setcolor button, command button, or fill button) and pressing the 
left mouse button, that screen button will be highlighted, indicating that 
you've  selected  that feature.   The setcolor button is the  only  unique 
button in that it will call up the setcolor dialog and allow you to change 
the current color pallete.

Whatever  color button you select,  that is the color you will draw  with.  
Whatever fill button you select,  that is the pattern that objects will be 
filled  with.   There are many other features which effect the outcome  of 
your  drawing and those are available from the drop down menus.     


























 
  Keys and Keystrokes                                              Page 9



Almost  all of Screen-Draws functions have  keyboard  equivalents.   Color 
selections  are  cycled  by  the use of the  up  and  down  arrows.   Fill 
selections  are cycled by the use of the left and right  arrows.   Drawing 
commands  have keys with the first letter of their name assigned to  them.  
For  example the key equivalent for Plot is P.   There are commands  which 
are related to other commands such as Circle and PCircle.   These  related 
commands  can be set by pressing the ALT key and the first letter  of  the 
related command.  For example, the key equivalent for PCircle is ALT-C.

Finally,  there are three other very important keys which are not assigned 
in  the above manner.   The key equivalent for Erase Object is the  Delete 
key.   If you would like to clear the workscreen then you would press  the 
Clr Home key.   You can only do this from the drawing screen.  And last bu 
not least is the UNDO key.   This key also can only be used on the drawing 
screen.   It will undo whatever you're last action was and it can also  be 
used to undo an undo.   Be sure,  however, to undo your mistake before you 
go about doing anymore drawing or undo will not work.  Though you can just 
erase your mistake with the Erase Object command, so all is not lost.


  Screens and Mouse Control



When you first run Screen-Draw you will find yourself on the menu  screen.  
This screen is where you choose which drawing command to use,  which color 
you'd like to draw with,  etc.  There are also many options available from 
the  menu  bar which will effect certain aspects  of  your  drawing.   For 
example,  in the Line menu you can choose what type of line,  the size  of 
line, and the type of line ends which you want to appear when you go about 
drawing lines.   The same type of options are available for text under the 
Text menu.  

Now,  to do some drawing,  you must first go to the drawing screen.  To do 
this,  just press the right mouse button.   The sole purpose of the  right 
mouse  button is to switch between the menu screen and the drawing  screen 
as long as your not in the middle of drawing something such as a line.  If 
you  do happen to be in the middle of a command,  your first  right  mouse 
button click will let go of that command and then another right click will 
switch screens for you.  All drawing commands are affected this way except 
for Plot and Fill.








 
  Colors                                                           Page 10



Colors  can be selected either by left clicking on them with the mouse  on 
the  menu screen or by using the up and down arrow keys to  cycle  through 
them.   Only the colors available to the current resolution will appear on 
the  screen.   To  change the avaiable colors you must left click  on  the 
Setcolor button.  Doing this in low or medium resolution will bring up the 
setcolor  dialog  box but in high resolution the screen  colors  are  just 
flipped since only two (Black and White) are available.

In  the setcolor dialog you will find the mini color palette,  from  which 
colors can be selected with a left mouse button click.  Under this, on the 
left,  you will find the RGB numbers which make up the currently  selected 
color.   To  change  these numbers just left click on either the  +  or  - 
buttons above whichever number you wish to change.   If you'd like all the 
colors  restored  to the ST/STE default color palette then  click  on  the 
Default  button  and select yes in the following  alert  box.   When  your 
finished  changing  colors,  you  can either keep  your  changes  by  left 
clicking  on the Okay button or you can ignore any color changes you  made 
by  left clicking on the Cancel button.   After you select either  one  of 
these buttons the setcolor dialog will disappear and your changes will  be 
registered.



  Fill Patterns



Fill patterns are displayed on the right hand side of the menu screen  and 
can be selected by either left clicking on a pattern with the mouse or  by 
cycling  through the patterns using the left and right  arrow  keys.   You 
can change fill patterns while on the drawing screen by using the left and 
right arrow keys.

Only  the  ST/STE system fill patterns are available in  this  version  of 
Screen-Draw, but this will change in the next version.



  Leaving Screen-Draw



To exit Screen-Draw, all you need to do is select Quit in the File menu on 
the menu screen.  If you haven't saved your work, the program will ask you 
if  you'd like to,  before exiting.   If you have saved  your  work,  then 
Screen-Draw will just exit, no questions asked.



 
THE DRAWING COMMANDS                                               Page 11
  Plot

  Keypress: P


The Plot command is used to draw individual points or freehand lines.   To 
draw  a point,  press the left mouse button once and then release  it.   A 
point  will be drawn in the currently selected color at the current  mouse 
position.  To draw freehand, press and hold down the left mouse button and 
move  the  mouse  around to draw.   Let go of the button  when  your  done 
drawing.

The only parameter which effects Plot is Color.   To select a color,  just 
left  click  your choice on the menu screen or use the up and  down  arrow 
keys on either screen.

The  last point or freehand line drawn can be undone by pressing the  UNDO 
key while on the drawing screen or by using the Erase Object command.




  Line

  Keypress: L



The  Line command is used to draw lines on the screen.   To draw  a  line, 
position the mouse cursor on the screen where you'd like the line to start 
and  click  the left mouse button once.   Then move the mouse  around  the 
screen  to the place you'd like the line to end and press the  left  mouse 
button once more.  Your line will then be drawn.  If you are in the middle 
of drawing a line and decide not to,  or you'd like to choose a new  start 
point, then click the right mouse button once and start over again.

The  following  parameters affect the appearance of a line  and  are  each 
described in their own sections of the manual:

Graphmode - page 19
Linestyle - page 19
Line Thickness - page 19
Line Ends - page 19


There is also, of course, Color, which has already been explained above.

The  last line drawn can be undone by pressing the UNDO key while  on  the 
drawing screen or by using the Erase Object command.



 
  Box                                                              Page 12

  Keypress: B



The Box command is used to draw a square or rectangular outline.  Position 
the  mouse cursor where you'd like the first corner of the box  to  appear 
and press the left mouse button once.   Then move the mouse until the  box 
shape you want is shown and press the left mouse button once more.  To let 
go of a box while drawing,  just press the right mouse button once and you 
can start over again.

The Box command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Line Style - page 19
Line Thickness - page 19

The  last box drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on  the  drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.




  PBox

  Keypress: ALT-B



The PBox command is used to draw a filled square or  rectangle.   Position 
the  mouse cursor where you'd like the first corner of the box  to  appear 
and press the left mouse button once.   Then move the mouse until the  box 
shape you want is shown and press the left mouse button once more.  To let 
go of a box while drawing,  just press the right mouse button once and you 
can start over again.

The filled box can also be drawn with an outline by turning the Bndry item 
in the Options menu on.  See page 20 for more details.

The PBox command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Fill Pattern - page 10
Boundary - page 20

The  last box drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on  the  drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.


 
  RBox                                                             Page 13

  Keypress: R



The  RBox  command is used to draw a square or  rectangular  outline  with 
rounded  corners.   Position the mouse cursor where you'd like  the  first 
corner  of the box to appear and press the left mouse button  once.   Then 
move  the mouse until the box shape you want is shown and press  the  left 
mouse button once more.   To let go of a box while drawing, just press the 
right mouse button once and you can start over again.

The RBox command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Line Style - page 19
Line Thickness - page 19

The  last box drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on  the  drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.




PRBox

Keypress: ALT-R



The  PRBox  command  is used to draw a filled  square  or  rectangle  with 
rounded  corners.   Position the mouse cursor where you'd like  the  first 
corner  of the box to appear and press the left mouse button  once.   Then 
move  the mouse until the box shape you want is shown and press  the  left 
mouse button once more.  To let got of a box while drawing, just press the 
right mouse button once and you can start over again.

The filled box can also be drawn with an outline by turning the Bndry item 
in the Options menu on.  See page 20 for more details.

The PRBox command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Fill Pattern - page 10
Boundary - page 20

The  last box drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on  the  drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.


 
  Circle                                                           Page 14

  Keypress: C



The Circle command is used to draw a circular outline.  Position the mouse 
cursor  where you'd like the center of the circle to appear and press  the 
left mouse button once.   Then move the mouse until the circular shape you 
want is shown and press the left mouse button once more.   To let go of  a 
circle while drawing,  just press the right mouse button once and you  can 
start over again.

The Circle command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Line Style - page 19
Line Thickness - page 19

The last circle drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on the drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.




  PCircle

  Keypress: ALT-C



The PCircle command is used to draw a filled circle.   Position the  mouse 
cursor  where you'd like the center of the circle to appear and press  the 
left mouse button once.   Then move the mouse until the circular shape you 
want is shown and press the left mouse button once more.   To let go of  a 
circle while drawing,  just press the right mouse button once and you  can 
start over again.

The  filled circle can also be drawn with an outline by turing  the  Bndry 
item in the Options menu on.  See page 20 for more details.

The PCircle command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Fill Pattern - page 10
Boundary - page 20

The last circle drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on the drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.


 
  Ellipse                                                          Page 15

  Keypress: E



The Ellipse command is used to draw an elliptical outline.   Position  the 
mouse  cursor  where you'd like the center of the ellipse  to  appear  and 
press  the  left  mouse  button once.   Then  move  the  mouse  until  the 
elliptical  shape you want is shown and press the left mouse  button  once 
more.   To let go of an ellipse while drawing,  just press the right mouse 
button once and you can start over again.

The Ellipse command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Line Style - page 19
Line Thickness - page 19

The  last  ellipse  drawn can be deleted by pressing  UNDO  while  on  the 
drawing screen or by using the Erase Object command.




  PEllipse

  Keypress: ALT-E



The PEllipse command is used to draw a filled ellipse.  Position the mouse 
cursor where you'd like the center of the ellipse to appear and press  the 
left  mouse button once.   Then move the mouse until the elliptical  shape 
you want is shown and press the left mouse button once more.  To let go of 
an ellipse while drawing,  just press the right mouse button once and  you 
can start over again.

The filled ellipse can also be drawn with an outline by turning the  Bndry 
item in the Options menu on.  See page 20 for more details.

The PEllipse command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Fill Pattern - page 10
Boundary - page 20

The  last  ellipse  drawn can be deleted by pressing  UNDO  while  on  the 
drawing screen of by using the Erase Object command.


 
  Fill                                                             Page 16

  Keypress: F



The  Fill  command is used to fill any enclosed area  with  the  currently 
selected fill pattern.  Position the mouse cursor inside the area you want 
filled  and  press  the left mouse button once.   The area  will  then  be 
filled.

A  fill  pattern  can be selected by going to the  menu  screen  and  left 
clicking  on the desired fill pattern button or the left and  right  arrow 
keys can be used to cycle through the available patterns.

The Fill command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Fill Pattern - page 10

The  last Fill done can be deleted by pressing UNDO while on  the  drawing 
screen or by using the Erase Object command.



  Text

  Keypress: T



The Text command is used to draw upper- and lowercase letters, punctuation 
and  numbers.   Position  the mouse cursor where you'd like  the  text  to 
appear  and  then type your message on the keyboard.   The  BACKSPACE  key 
erases  the last character and the ESC key erases the whole line of  text, 
allowing  you  to start over again.   When your finished  typing  you  can 
reposition  the text with the mouse if you'd like or just press  the  left 
mouse button once to place the text on the screen.

Text attributes (type,  direction,  and size) can be changed by  selecting 
the appropriate items in the Text menu.  See page XX for more details.

The Text command is affected by the following parameters:

Color - page 10
Graphmode - page 19
Text Style - page 19
Text Direction - page 19
Text Size - page 19

The  last  text line drawn can be deleted by pressing UNDO  while  on  the 
drawing screen or by using the Erase Object command.
 
  Erase Object                                                     Page 17

  Keypress: DELETE



The  Erase  Object command is used to delete objects from the  screen  and 
from the main data array.  When Erase Object is selected, Screen-Draw will 
attach a small square to each object on the screen.   To delete an object, 
just position the mouse cursor over its attached square and press the left 
mouse button once.  Screen-Draw will then take a few seconds to delete the 
object.   In the case of free-hand plot lines Screen-Draw may take quite a 
while deleting, so be aware of this when deleting such objects.

The last object erased can be brought back by pressing the UNDO key  while 
on the drawing screen.



The Menu Bar
  File
    Load



The  Load  menu  item is used to load in a  Screen-Draw  file  from  disk.  
Please  refer  to  your  ST/STE manual if  you  don't  understand  how  to 
accomplish this.

Screen-Draw files from different resolutions can also be loaded.  An alert 
box  will ask you whether you'd like the picture converted to the  current 
resolution  and you can answer either yes or no.   Either way the  picture 
will  be loaded.   The conversion process only resizes the  picture  data.  
Any  text  in  the picture will remain at its original size  but  will  be 
positioned correctly.

Screen_Draw files have the following extentions:

.DR0 Low Resolution
.DR1 Medium Resolution
.DR2 High Resolution












 
    Save                                                           Page 18



The  Save menu item is used to save a Screen-Draw file  to  disk.   Please 
refer to you ST/STE manual if you don't understand how to accomplish this.

The  current  picture  and color palette will be saved to  disk  with  the 
appropriate file extention according to resolution.

Screen-Draw files have the following extentions:

.DR0 Low Resolution
.DR1 Medium Resolution
.DR2 High Resolution




    Save as .LST



The  Save  as .LST menu item is used to convert the  current  picture  and 
color  palette into a GFA Basic .LST file.   This file can then be  merged 
with your program code.  This function is the very reason this program was 
written.

The  picture  data  can be saved as is or it can be  saved  as  resolution 
independent.   This means that the data is saved with additional  resizing 
code so that it can be displayed in all resolutions. This does not include 
text since it needs to be reformated to be converted.   All other  picture 
data is resizeable though.   You will be given this option before you save 
the file.




    Quit



The Quit menu item is used to exit Screen-Draw and return to the  desktop.  
If you haven't saved your picture data yet,  you'll be asked if you'd like 
to do so before exiting.








 
  Line                                                             Page 19



The Line menu is used to set the line attributes.  You can select the line 
style, line size, and how you'd like line ends to appear.  Just select the 
attributes  you'd  like  by  left clicking  with  mouse.   Some  of  these 
attributes also affect commands other than Line.

Commands affected by line attributes are:

Line
Box
Circle
Ellipse




  Text



The Text menu is used to set the text attributes.  You can select the text 
style,  text direction,  and text size.  Text styles can be mixed, such as 
underlined and italic at the same time.   Just select the attributes you'd 
like by left clicking with the mouse.





  GMode



The  GMode menu is used to set the Graphmode.   This determines  how  your 
command is written to the screen.   You can find details in the GFA  Basic 
manual.














 
  Options                                                          Page 20

    Bndry



The  Bndry menu item is used to turn the outline of filled objects on  and 
off.   If on,  then an outline will be drawn around filled objects such as 
PBox,  PRBox,  PCircle, and PEllipse.  If off, then an outline will not be 
drawn.




    Grid



The  Grid  menu item is used to turn the drawing screen grid on  and  off.  
The menu items below that are used to determine the size of the grid.  The 
grid can also be turned on and off by using G on the keyboard and when the 
grid is actie the size can be selected by using the 1,2,3,  and 4 keys  on 
the keyboard.

The grid can be used to align objects on the drawing screen, which is very 
useful when designing a control type screen for a program.

The grid sizes available are:

Size2 - a 2x2 grid.
Size4 - a 4x4 grid.
Size8 - an 8x8 grid.
Size 16 - a 16x16 grid.



This program was written using GFA Basic version 3.5E.
GFA Basic is Copyright 1988 by GFA Systemtechnik GmbH.

