Documentation for MAILMNT.PRG

Purpose :

Reduce the number of mailbox directories for users using mailbox directories

Written :

04/26/99	by John Rojewski

Overview:

As a user receives email using the mailbox directories, the number of directories tends
to increase, unless the user deletes all mail older than a certain date.

Since I tend to accumulate mail over years, the number of mail directories increased to 
average around 15-20 directories per month.  The purpose of MAILMNT.PRG is to compress the
mail directories into 1 per month.  This is practical for older messages, and will reduce 
the number of directories, while placing the mail messages into a directory named for the 
month the message was received.

I you do not use the 'Create Mail Directories' option, you have no need of this program.

Program Flow:

MAILMNT.PRG performs the following functions:
- Asks user to locate main Mail Directory
- Checks directories for consistancy
- Allows user to select which monthly directories to create/compress
- copy contents of daily mailbox directories into monthly directories
- daily directories look like: YYYYMMDD, monthly look like: YYYYMM
- all mailboxes containing renamed/moved mail must have the filepath updated

The OK button proceeds to produce the next result, and will stop and display the alert
box for user approval.  The Continue button gives the signal to continue processing without
the alerts popping up all the time.  The Continue button is useful once you have determined
that MAILMNT.PRG is doing what it is supposed to do.

Recomendations:

For best results, make certain your mail messages are contained in a mailbox by running
MAILBOX.PRG proir to running MAILMNT.PRG

Creating a complete backup of your mail Directory is suggested, but can take some time to
copy all the individual files.  If your mail is important, you should perform backups 
regularly.
 
If you have difficulties, contact me via email (rojewski@primenet.com) for assistance.

end of documentation.