Hey everybody!:

	I was visiting a little software shop checking out what new titles
might be out for the Jag and found something pretty cool - a simple doc that
describes how to construct your own network cable!  I've done it and it
works pretty well!

	Since I haven't signed an NDA yet and I haven't seen it posted here,
I typed it EXACTLY as it was written (following the request of it's anonymous
author) and appended it to the end of this message!

	I hope everybody out there that uses this will follow the request
of it's author and buy the catbox when it's out.  If you don't, you suck!!!
Hurry up ICD/Atari!  Get to it!!!  In the mean time, this will do.

Thoughts on Club Drive Trucking:

	I don't think it's as bad as all the reviews have made it out to be.
I mean, it could be 50x better, but it's not bad.  I look at it this way -
it's a first gen crude engine that they've created.  The Doom engine went
through Wolf 3d and "Catacomb Abyss" to get to it's current degree of
awesomeness.  There are many examples like this throughout software history.
I hope they find reason to continue advancing this engine as I think it shows
a lot of promise.

	I find the tunes to be amazing.  Like really amazing.  Jazzy and
smooth sounding - great music to drive by :)  The bar-room piano and the
sax soundtracks are really happening!

	The update rate could've been faster, but it's not bad.  The biggest
problem I have with the graphics are the lack of effective shading of the
road.  It's all one color, no matter how far away in the distance it stretches.
This isn't much of a problem on the San Fran track as there are lines on the
road - but other tracks don't have that.  They could've thrown in some player/
missile graphics or something to add like pebbles in the road, or tracks
on the ground, or road runners (wild west), or... etc.  I like the fact
that there is a missile right beside the Atari building in the weird tunnel
place :)  You can get some really big air off of the missile in the "Jurassic
Park" place.  The "secret" places are pretty cool.

	It would've been nice if the cars had weapons de la Spy Hunter to
make the road a little slippery or foggy or whatever.

	Control isn't as bad as what I was hearing.  But then again, I don't
find Bruce Lee control to be difficult either (except for "option", which I
don't use - they need to come out with a six button controller for it to be
used effectively with the "option" moves - but they really aren't necessary
moves).

	The game is fun!  I'd recommend getting into an altered state of 
consciousness - be it via porter (driving drunk is fun) or via other things
(esp. smoke - the tunes are made for it) and go for a spin!  Woooohoooooo!

	Once again, I'd like to see a CD version of the game which would have
like a bizillion tracks to race on.  I'd like to see a CD version of every
game that they've put out thusfar.  Even Trevor McFur.  Sometimes quantity
can help offset problems in quality.  For example, TMF would be much more
interesting if there were actual FMV clips thrown in between levels and stuff.
The Boss animation sequences could be done using FMV and therefore look 50x
better & smoother...  There is a lot they could've done (including slowing
down the gameplay too - I find it too fast).

	By the way: is iD going to release Doom II for the Jag on CD?
I mean, if it was on CD, they wouldn't have to leave anything out at all!
They don't have to change the engine - just import the doom II WAD to the
jag...  I personally find Dead Simple to be the most challenging level
ever - especially on Nightmare.  Oh yeah - return nightmare to "respawning"
the deadies!!!


Happy hacking!,
PHIL


Here's the doc:

Hey jag user:

	Find below a description of how to construct a cable that allows
two jaguars to be connected together locally for "networked" play for Doom.

	If you use this cable, buy the "Catbox" networking product when it is
finally released.  If you don't buy the "Catbox" when it is released, you are
hurting the market for Jaguar products and you really suck.  Continued support
for the Jaguar is dependent upon the market that exists.  If Atari only sells
a few Catboxes, support for the Catbox will be dropped.

	I ask that you freely distribute this doc unmodified and that you do
not profit from the info. herein.  If it suits you, go out and give copies of
this doc to BBSs and stores in your local area to distribute with JagDoom or
any other networkable games that arrive in the future.  Stop distributing this
doc when the Catbox arrives, as it will no longer be necessary!!!

	I figured this out on my own, without help.  I am not currently under
a non-disclosure agreement, but I distribute this anonymously to avoid any
potential future conflicts with Atari.

	I guess I'll give this a name - call it the "China Cat Sunflower"
cable, and this doc the "China Cat Sunflower" doc.

	Oh - one last thing: if you know him, tell the "Circuit Breaker" that
the guy who he borrowed the Atari 8-bit Technical Reference Notes from wants
them back now.  It's about 9 years overdue :)

Peace & Enjoy!

Here is a representation of the DSP connector on the back of the Jag:

   1   2   3   4   5   6                     Top of jag
   7   8   9   10  11  12                    Bottom

The connection is as follows:

Connector A                     Connector B

     8                               9
     9                               8
     12                              12

Go out and buy a "PC card edge connector" from radio shack, such as Cat. No.
276-1453.  Saw it down to the appropriate size (the ends work nice and avoid
worries of connector contact alignment screw-ups).  Make sure that you solder
nice and clean.  Shielded cables, such as Cat. No. 42-2355a will work well :)

Network errors happen.  I've found that they don't happen all that often
and usually in bunches.  Use shielded cables and keep the length down.

Disclaimer:  Atari surely doesn't recommend that you do this.  Using it
probably violates your warranty.  I assume no liability for any damage
caused by the use of the described cable.  Use at your own risk.  Though it
is nearly inconceivable to me that somebody could screw it up, CHECK YOUR
WORK BEFORE YOU PLUG IN!  Make sure connectors are aligned properly, etc. 

tF


