       Well, well this is the beginning of the end of all this... 
 You have now seen all screens and this is the reset screen in which 
you get informations (see above) and a big amount of bullshit 
(here...)   But as Tyrem is starving to death and we have planned to 
go to the 'Pizza Hut' I will have to finish this very fast.   Ok, did 
you have fun with this demo ???  Yes ???  Then you will surely want 
to send us some money !!! (address see above...)   This demo is 
shareware and shouldn't be sold in PD-Libraries or anything of this 
kind except when a part of the earned money is send to us...   If you 
write to us please enclose some International Reply Coupons... 
  Tyrem just told me that you're probably now waiting for the 
greetings, so here they are...     Megagigagreetings go to The 
Respectables (thanks for all these wonderful graphix and the nice 
times we had in the last weeks while finishing this demo... hope 
you'll do also the graphix for our next productions)   The Garlic 
Eaters (special thanx to Chris: what would our demo be without all 
these musix...  probably much much better ???  no, I'm just 
kidding...  Chris loves Almut !!!)   The Lost Boys (thanx for the two 
diskfiller screens)   Delta Force (thanx for this very good 
protection...)   Dizzy of Tool 8 (please send me some of your 
handdrawn girls...)   Oxar from The Black Wizards (thanx for the 
font)   Axe of Delight (thanx for the packer...)   NeXT (hello Zae, 
hope you'll spread our demo...)   New Power Generation (sorry for not 
including your screen, but it didn't work on all ST's...)   The 
Exceptions (especially Daryl, great fullscreen in the Terror...) 
  The Replicants (hi Snake)   ST-News (hi to Richard, the mirinda 
drinker...)   The Carebears (a special hello from Tyrem)   TNT-Crew 
(hello to the burper)   FOXX (hi Monster Chuck)   Legacy (hello to 
the guy with the smelly feet...)   Gigabyte Crew (the blue one and 
the ill one)   Marc Rosocha (great games...)   Chris Jungen (great 3D 
graphix...)   Animi Dux (who are looking for another coder... write 
to Animi Dux   P.O.Box 225   270 Mos   Iceland )   B.M.T (hi Ford 
Perfect, sorry, but I didn't have the time for writing letters in the 
last months...)   Overlanders (hello to Ziggy, great 3D...) 
  ST-Connexion   Chris Mad   Aenigmatica   Galtan 6   Sync   Omega 
  and last but least The Braindrops   and everybody I forgot    Well 
and now for the fucking greetings, they go to ...    No, we won't 
tell you as we don't think that these people deserve being even 
mentioned anyway...     Ok, now if you wanna get in touch with either 
The Fate or Tyrem then phone to:   --352 39056 (The Fate, Luxembourg, 
ask for Christian)   or   --49 651 27200 (Tyrem, West-Germany, ask 
for Stefan)     Well, now it's really time to stop and so we will 
meet again in some seconds at the beginning of this scroll.... 
                                                  
