
                        Welcome to Ecology!

ECOLOGY.POG is an ecological simulation which you can control.
The creatures in this world are:

Green dots      --      Generated by fountains.
Red circles     --      They eat green dots.
Blue circles    --      They eat green dots.
Purplers        --      They eat green dots.
Harrys (orange) --      They eat reds, blues and purplers.

The top of the display tells the number of times the creatures
have Evolve()'d, how many of each creature currently exists and
the total number of creatures alive.

Use the keyboard to set up the environment:

F       --      Place a fountain at a random location.
R       --      Place a red at a random location.
B       --      Place a blue at a random location.
P       --      Place a purpler at a random location.
H       --      Place a Harry at a random location.

K       --      Kills all creatures so you can create a new
                universe.
 
Reds, blues, purplers and Harrys will occasionally wander
offscreen; if they do, they may starve to death and never make it
back to the main screen since green dots will never go
offscreen.  You can still tell if a creature is alive by
monitoring the number of living creatures.

Reds are the only creatures that don't move.  All creatures will
reproduces when they get large enough.  Creatures also die after
a certain period of time, or if they don't get enough food.

Purplers will mutate over time so you can see natural selection
in action.  If there is at least one purpler alive, the bottom of
the screen will show:

-- The average "fear" of the purplers, which is when they start
   fleeing from Harrys.

-- The average size at which purplers reproduce.

-- Their average lifespan.

-- Their average speed.

-- Their average beginning size.

If there is an "object" to Ecology, it is to create a balanced
eco-system.  This program has undergone numerous revisions; feel
free to change the creatures' parameters or even add new
creatures.

Enjoy!

