Hi there,

First of all a very big Thanx to Earx for making the compilation.

And second, thank you for listening to my music. There are 4 modules of
myself included in this compil. The origin of the modules where DTM files.
Now i can imagine you're asking :"why DTM?" , well this is a program
that has few few features that some other trackers didn't have at the time
of making these DTM modules. Nowadays there are much more Trackers, like
Groumftracker, that support functions like panning and stuff like that.
As I used the Digital Tracker more and more, it became a standard program
for me to make music in.

And one important thing for me is that there are resource files for
playing DTM files within GFA Basic.  I'm a GFA Basic Fan just because
it a good basic and there are a lot of things you can do with it.
So my next Compil will be one that is written in GFA. Trying to complete
it in the year 2000 ;)


Just a little history about D-Force . (You can skip it if you like,
                                       because it's just some sentimental
                                       memories ;) )

My first Atari was a 600XL, I got it for my birthday.
I was 10 at that age, so you know what you did when you got a computer....
Got a few books from the local store (Enough books at that time. nowadays
you have to look in every corner of a bookstore if they 'might' have an
Atari book) that was labeled 'Op SAFARI door de ATARI' wich is the same as
'On Safari Trought The Atari'.    Man !!! What a book that was !!

I could make my own drawings with my joystick !! Then the next programming
level came in ... Make the drawings with the Paddles !
That was even better, because you had totally controle over the writing
pixels. WOW !!
Hey somthing new was added .. SOUND !! The most interresting part ;)
Poky-ing some sounds. FANTASTIC! Making my own music..
I felt i owned the world ;))

Things got bigger and there was time for an extention. The 800XL..
The next step was a 1040STe. Wich had DMA Sound ! wich was far better than
the stupid PC's at that time. I got the famous TCB tracker and made my
first modules (you know the TCB tracker with the nice osc.scope in the
middle of the tracker).
And working with 3,5" Disks was outstanding, far more better that with the
tapes, that wore out after a time.
I even got a memory extension for the STe, wich was very simple.
Just get some simms, plug them in and .. .. Ready ! 4Megs
Got a Sampler from ACN (Atari Club Netherlands) and sampled the whole
earth onto disks. I had many disks back then, for about 10 boxes holding
for about 80 disks each ( I think you all know what i mean ;) )

At school I met Marco de Boer,
trading some software, software and some more software. After a while
i asked him what he did more then only copying software. And that's where
it began where I slowly entered the Scene. Made some musix for DBA.
Entering some mod compil's under someone else his name   ;) LOL !
Even made some tunes for Sentry, although I never knew if they have
arrived. Made some for the Crux.

You probably have never heard of the crux, and that's correct. That's
because I created this group together with a friend of mine that had an
Atari 1040 STfm. He did some GFX and I did the Music. The only thing that
was missing was a programmer ;)) So it never worked out.

Then I got a Falcon with the powerfull DSP chip onboard. Even the Amiga
freax where jealous. Harddisk recording with 8 channels at the same time.
Never been seen before! Morphing, Raytracing etc. etc.  It was so Fast !!

And then I got a program with wich you could play 32 channels at the same
time. And that was Digital Tracker.



Today !

That's a bit of the history of myself, for the onces who didn't know this.


Nowadays i'm still active in the music buisness, making dance-a-ble music
with a friend in his studio. And ofcourse making nice tunes on the Atari
for our group FUN (Falcon Users Netherlands), and for others that are
interrested in my sort of music. Should be no problem.

My first release is, together with some other musicians, really great!
I very much like the intro, osc. and the rotating logo's. Simple text
though, but the most important thing is the music, right :?)


A short overview of the Music files inside the Compil :

Fuzzy Logic  - well I think that the name says it all
Existance    - Tune made when I have had a lot of beer
               so i can't remember why i made this tune ;)
Insane       - A music made for an own sort of demo, but it didn't
               worked out that good, so I released it as a seperate file.
Satisfactory - This is a nice tune with a sort of House in it, Breakbeats
               and some nice strings

Invitation   - Is a song that is made by Comp7 specially made for the
               invitation for the PM Party

Suck on this - Nice tune with heavy big beats in it, but much like the
               prodigy style.

Warm summer night - Dance all time music. Always love musics like this.
                    you can always play them whenever you like.



Much more listening pleasure with music from an ATARI !


Matthijs Witteveen / D-force / FUN


Ps.

I'm hoping to release my Second Compil in the year 2000. Whenever that
maybe? Well i hope a.s.a.p. It's going to be called FFWD (FastForWarD).
Really I don't know what's going to be in it, but then again just listen
to it and make you own conclusions.
