This is a documentation file that comes with TriMod 2.5

TriMod is a shareware program by Eagle of Sentry. I know its rather strange
for a coder to make shareware, but I spended much time on this utility that
saves you lots of time to implement Trisound Music and is Ready to be put
into games. TriMod may be copied free, but with all the files:

                        TRIMOD25.PRG    The actual convertor
                        TRIMOD25.S      An example playing source
                        TRIMOD25.TXT    Manuel file

This is not for me but for the next user, because he/she also has a right to
know how the program works, and how to use it.

If you start TRIMOD25.PRG you get a dialog with four icons on it. The most
right one, is a drawing of the desktop and enables you to quit from TriMod.

The second-right icon (the Sentry-Logo) is the way to the greetings page.

The second-left icon gives you some information about Trimod.

The most left icon is the most important one, clicking this will actualy start
the converting and you'll get another dialog containing the following options:

        STE Replay Speed, with this option you can tell the TriMod replayer at
                          what speed it must replay Samples on the STE.

        Convert for STE,  you can force TriMod to replace all sample speeds by
                          the one selected by the STE Replay Speed.

        Remove Samples    From version 2.5 you are able to remove all unused
                          samples, you do it by saying yes to this option.
                          This option was build in because you can put some
                          samples in your voiceset that are not used in your
                          song for sound-effects in for example a game.

        ST Replay Speed   Alters the Maximum Replay Speed when you play in ST
                          mode (1 or 2). It does NOT convert the samples!
                          This function was only build in to make it easy to
                          put samples in your voiceset at a lower rate you
                          made the song with, it makes it possible to play
                          samples at 3Khz and 4Khz. This is not possible
                          within Trisound! So you can make a song with 6Khz
                          samples and when it's finnished you can load 3Khz
                          samples in your voiceset and let Trisound do the
                          song conversion.

        GO!               Do the conversion, you'll get three fileselectors
                          which will give you all the information you'll need.

This version is tested with lots of music, almost all songs from Scavenger of
Synergy (thank you very much for the music) and a few from MAC of Sentry.
All bugs from old versions are removed and TriMod plays exactly the same way
like Trisound does BUT it is MUCH FASTER at replaying!! AND it is able to play
samples through the STE DMA Chip. The used Replay methode is the fastest
possible on a normal ST.

TriMod is a product from SENTRY DEVELOPER TEAM and may NOT BE SPREAD BY
ACN! They MAY NOT PUT IT IN THERE PUBLIC DOMAIN LIBRARY! It may only be Spread
by The Elite BBS's (from GOOD Crews like Hotline, Delta Force, Lost Boys,
Sewer Soft and 'Sentry') and by G.E.G. PUBLIC DOMAIN! (See advert in START,
the May/June 1992 edition).

Enjoy you copy of TriMod,
Eagle of Sentry.




