AAFALL.PRG
**********

This is a piece of demonstration code which loads in the NEOCHROME
waterfall and cycles the colours on it to make the water flow (so Hi-res
is out of the question, I'm afraid).  I originally prepared it years ago
for the MONOCHROME internet site at City University (is it still going, 
anyone?), and I can't remember if I ever sent it in to ICTARI (I also
don't remember if I cried, when I.. read about his widowed bride, but
something.. touched me.. deep inside, the day.. the music.. died).  Anyway, 
here it is. 

AAFALL.NEO - a copy of the NEOCHROME waterfall picture
AAFALL.S   - the source code of the demo
AAFALL.PRG - the executable demo program
AAFALL.TXT - this message

AAFALL.S is fully commented.  It actually incorporates two sections
which I normally keep in separate .S files and place INCLUDE commands
in my code to bring them in when the code is assembled.  The first section
is a STARTUP/EXIT routine that sets up the memory as required, then calls
the main code.  On return, it performs a tidy exit.  The second section is
a LOAD FILE routine, that also defines a MACRO to help you call it.  The
main code comes after these two sections.

Run AAFALL.PRG (AAFALL.NEO must be in the same directory) and use LEFT and
RIGHT on the joystick to control the speed of the colour cycling.  Press 
SPACE to exit.  Press FIRE to reverse the cycling, and see the water flow
uphill.  Strange?
Not so...

In Fortean Times #74, Pg 55 is a photograph taken by one Joe Kelly of 
Mold, Clwyd, of a waterfall doing just that.  The waterfall drops from
Benbulben Mountain into the north bank of Glencar Lake in County Sligo, 
Eire.  This is near Drumcliffe churchyard where W.B.Yeats is buried, and
is referred to in his poem 'The Stolen Child'.  Local legend has it that
the western one of the three separate cataracts can, if you are lucky,
be seen to flow up the mountain.  In actual fact the wind in the lower
valley can be so strong as to stop the water in mid-descent, and blow it
back up and over the mountain in a fine mist.  Cool or what?

JJ Railton, 26/01/96
