


                   Sozobon C Compiler - Problem Report Form

      To submit a problem report, please edit a copy of this file. In
      each section, replace the descriptive text with the information
      requested. We do appreciate your feedback, but cannot guarantee
      personal responses to all the reports we receive. Send your
      reports to:

           Tony Andrews
           5902E Gunbarrel Ave.
           Boulder, CO 80301
           USA

      Name:                                   Date: MM/DD/YY
      Phone: optional
      Address: optional

      Email address:
           List any email addresses through which you can be reached.

      Description:
           Briefly describe the problem, but save any example code for
           the next section.

      Repeat by:
           Describe how the problem can be repeated. If the problem
           can't be repeated reliably, describe the symptons as well as
           you can. Be as specific as possible, and include code
           fragments where helpful.

      Suggested Fix:
           If you have a fix for the bug, great! Put it here. If you
           have any other ideas or suggestions regarding the problem,
           put those here too.

      Environment:

           Many problems are specific to the hardware or software
           environment being used. To help us duplicate your problem,
           please describe your development environment here as
           described below.

           Hardware:
                Describe your hardware setup here. Include system model
                number, memory size, number and type of floppy drives,
                and hard disk size, if applicable.

           Operating System:
                [ ] TOS
                [ ] Minix
                [ ] Other (describe here)

           Software:
                Describe the software setup you use. Do you use GEM
                directly? Have a batch file processor? Do you use a
                shell? If so, which one?

                RAM Disk? [ ] Yes  [ ] No    Size:





