The ACTIVE file lists the servers that babel should get news from, and what 
groups it should get from each. It also lists the local filenames in which 
to store news, and any options for each group such as to retrieve headers 
only.

At the moment you have to edit the ACTIVE file by hand, but I do not think 
that should be any problems for you since the format of the file is simple. 
In the future, this should be handled by the newsreader.

The description below is therefore of use for ALL, but when setup in 
FireNews is ready, the description will still be here in the document.

The ACTIVE file contains a list of server lines, followed by group lines, 
each indented by a tab, with optional option lines under each one, indented 
by a further tab. Here is an example ACTIVE file

NOTE: this format is not Finalized and could change with new versions of 
Babel/FireNews, but when it changes, there will be both new versions of 
Babel and Firenews out that will support it. (in fact a new system that is 
more multi-user-friendly is beeing dicussed, that would require changes 
in this file)

time +1
new-server one.new.server
server yet.another.server yas
    date 971106 210606
    max-days 30
    group comp.sys.atari.programmer prog
        desc Programming on the atari computer
        days 28
    group comp.sys.atari.st.tech techie
        desc Technical discussions of Atari ST
        days 28
    group comp.binaries.psion psion
        desc Binaries for psion computers
        headers-only

Here follows a description of ALL the different commands in the ACTIVE file.

    time <timediff>
        This is needed to tell Babel how much different the local time (your 
        time) is from GMT (the time in greenwich)

    new-server <servername>
        new-server indicates a server that hasn't been used before. babel 
        will read the full group list from it, and will find what the server 
        thinks the time is. you will have to change the <servername> with 
        the name of your news-server.
        In the future Babel will get a complete list of the different 
        news-groups that this server holds. but at the moment that function 
        is under reconstruction and therefore not in the current babel.

    server <servername> <filename>
        Defines a server that should be accessed. Babel connects to the 
        server(with the name of <servername>)and reads the names of the new 
        groups, and their descriptions.

    local (NOT Implemented Yet)
        This server is an "local" server, ie there is no server to connect 
        to. I have included this so that news-groups that are to be present 
        one one machine only, and never sent to the real net can be 
        established.
        
    date <date> <time> <GMT?> (NOT Implemented Yet)
        this entry tells babel when the server was last used, The date time 
        here tells from what time new groups-names/descriptions are to be 
        read.
        
    group <groupname> <filename> <msg-number>
        This is the almost most important lines in the ACTIVE file, since it 
        is this line that tells babel Which groups that you want to get news 
        in. the groupname can be found in the .NGP file for this server.
        The <filename> is the name that babel/FireNews is to use on the 
        local disc, and the <msg-number> is the number of the message that 
        was last retrieved from the server, by changeing this number you can 
        retrieve older messages again (if they still exist on the server).
        
        Each newsgroup can be followed by any of these lines. (NOTE: all of 
        these options can be written directly below the server name, before 
        the first gropu-name, it is then the default option for ALL the 
        groups.)

            desc <description>
                Followed by a name, gives a description of the group, read 
                from the server (or edited by hand by the user)

            days <number> (NOT Implemented yet)] 
                Specifies how many days an article should remain on the 
                system if not over-riden by an Expires: header.
                
            max-days <number> (NOT Implemented yet)]
                Specifies the maximum number of days an article can remain 
                on the system even if it has a longer time specified in a 
                header.

            headers-only]
                The groups should be read headers only; this is useful in 
                binaries groups, where one is unlikely to want everything in 
                the group, and therefore certainly doesn't want the cost 
                of downloading the whole group.

            read-only]
                There is no posting access to the group. This often 
                indicates one that is gatewayed from a mailing list by a 
                one-directional gateway; it may also denote a superseded 
                group, where you can post to the group that replaces it.

            mailto <e-mail adress> (NOT Implemented yet)]
                This option is mainly in use with the read-only option, 
                since when posting to a group with this option, it not only 
                post the message to the group (unless it is read-only) but 
                also post an e-mail message to the adress that is stated 
                here. At the moment only 1 of these will be recognised by 
                FireNews (per group), if more than 1 is written, only the 
                last one will remain. In the future More than 1 e-mail 
                adress should be able to be used. NOTE if the "server" is 
                "Local" the e-mail will still be sent, which will make this 
                a good tool to send out messages to a group of people.
                
            rescan (NOT Implemented yet)
                Babel should read all articles in the group rather than just 
                those that have appeared since the last connection.
                
            current <number>
                This is the current message pointer in FireNews, by 
                changeing this line you will change the active message in 
                FireNews for this group. therefore DO NOT TOUCH :)
