/*

 The Pro MIDI Player
 Copyright 1986-1994 By J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd.
 Released under the GPL in 2007
 Please see the file 'COPYING' including in this package.
 
*/
 
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pro MIDI Player DEMO Version documentation.
This text file is the raw text from the Full Pro MIDI Player's manual, with
little or no formatting.  The DEMO version of the Pro MIDI Player has all
the features but has a few limitations:

	* Most Internal Control functions are removed.
	* Only a few songs can be in a set.
	* Each song will only play for a short while.

This demo program is supplied so that you can see if the Pro MIDI Player meets
your sequencing needs.  This demo package is free to distribute, and is
Copyright 1986-1993 by J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd.  You may not modify
or sell this package.

The full version of the Pro MIDI Player retails for $125.00 canadian.
Dealer enquiries are welcome.  

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Pro MIDI Player

Version 8.0a

Copyright 1986-1993 
By J.D. Koftinoff Software Ltd., and Pro MIDI Systems, Ltd.


			J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd. 
			P.O. Box 4103
			Vancouver, BC
			Canada
			V6B-3Z6

			Voice: 	(604) 430-6827
			Fax: 	(604) 442-3233



Introduction

Thank you for choosing the Pro MIDI Player Version 8.0

This program is a MIDI 0 File Library and Playback System

It is not an entry level sequencer

It was written for MIDI users and entertainers who already have MIDI
songs composed and need very fast access to a large library of MIDI
files.  There are no editing features at all !

We developed this program shortly after the Atari 1040ST was released.
We were at the NAMM show in Atlanta in 1988 when the MIDI '0' file spec
was first proposed. We immediately implemented the format into our
Player program, and then waited for the standard to be incorporated
into the compositional sequencers on the market.

As far as we know, we were the first stand alone MIDI '0' sequencer on
the market. We've kept the program as simple as possible, while still
providing the features we feel are important for a live artist, using
MIDI files.

There are two ways to use the program!

#1. Without a Hard Drive

You will create a live SET disk that will auto load your MIDI files or
songs into RAM when you boot your computer.  The only limitation will
be the size of your RAM space.  A Mega ST-2 or 4 will hold more songs
than a 520ST or 1040ST.

#2. With a Hard Drive

This is for the power user. This gives you full advantage of the
library function for storage of 999 MIDI songs or files.  Access to
your songs and sets is much faster from your hard drive.


Getting Started

Before you use this program, we recommend that you make a backup copy
of your original disk and store it in a safe place!  This disk itself
is not copy protected, so make as many copies as you like.

NOTE:  The hardware dongle supplied must be inserted into the expansion
port of your Atari, serial # side up before you boot up your computer.

Once you have the dongle inserted, insert the program disk and turn on
your computer.  A window will open, showing you the contents of drive
A.  The following files should be on the program disk:

AUTO:		This folder contains PLAYER.TOS for automatic loading
of program on boot up.

SONGS:	Your songs (MID & TXT files) have to be
inside this folder.

SET_EDIT.PRG:	This program lets you edit SET files, which are lists
of songs. CFG_EDIT.PRG:	This program lets you configure the Pro  MIDI
Player.

PLAYER.TOS:	The Pro MIDI Player program

PERFORM.CFG:	The configuration file for your MIDI set up.

REC_EXCL.PRG:	The System Exclusive Recorder for Bulk Data Dumps.

README.TXT:	Double click on this file to see new additions.

To run the player program, double click on PLAYER.TOS and the demo
songs will load.

These songs are GS standard but will play any sound source module.
(Drums=CH-10, Bass=CH-2, Piano=CH-3, Strings=CH-4).

Once the songs are displayed on the screen, press the HELP key to show
you the commands that the player responds to from the keyboard. 
Pressing the spacebar will exit back to the playscreen, and pressing
the spacebar again will play the first song.  There is a text file for
each song that will display on the screen to give you further info on
the program.  Play with the different commands until you get a feel for
them.  When you're familiar with them and have checked out the demo
songs, you can exit back to the desktop by holding down the 'Control'
button and pressing 'G'.

Now, let's move on and load some of your own songs into the player
program.

NOTE:  A RAM disk or hard disk makes the copy and transfer process
extremely fast! If you don't have either, refer to the file transfer
procedure in your Atari manual.


Quick Start Instructions

	OK, you're a wiz with all this MIDI stuff and you've got a gig
this evening and want to impress all your friends with your new songs
and totally hip player program.  You don't have time to read the manual
and you're acquainted with all the terms we're using.  Your sequencer
exports MIDI 0 files, and you've saved your MIDI songs in that format. 
Your MIDI 0 files should have a 'MID' file extension.  Copy your MIDI
files into the SONGS folder.  Open the AUTO folder and double click on
PLAYER.TOS and Voila', your songs should all load and be displayed on
the play screen ready to go.  Press the HELP key when running the
PLAYER.TOS program to see more information on commands.


Getting Started Without a Hard Drive

	Once again, you will be creating a "live performance disk",
so....

STEP 1: Format a blank disk.

	This will be your first performance disk.  You can create as
many as you like.  Each disk will represent a different set.

STEP 2: Copy the following files and folders to your performance disk
from the distribution disk.

	'AUTO'	
	This folder contains the program PLAYER.TOS, which will
autoboot your songs and performance files.  You must rename the file
extension from TOS to PRG for it to run automatically on boot up.

	'SONGS'	
	This folder is where all your MIDI songs, text files, and
system exclusive files MUST reside, in order for the program to find
them.

	'PERFORM.CFG'
	This is your configuration default file, for live controller
options.  You will create one for your own set up with the CFG_EDIT.PRG
program.


	NOTE: The set file, 'PERFORM0.SET' does not have to be on your
live disk unless you want the songs to load in a specific order.  If
you want to chain play any songs in a specific order, you will have to
create a set file with the SET_EDIT.PRG program.





Getting Started With a Hard Drive

	Ideally, it's a good idea to load all the files on the original
disk to a partition on your hard drive that you allocate for this
program.  If there are other programs on the partition, just be sure
that there is not another SONGS folder to add confusion.

	You can erase the songs in the SONGS folder and copy your own
MIDI '0' files into the SONGS folder.  Double click on PLAYER.TOS and
your songs will load into RAM.  They are now ready to play.


Hard Disk Library

	This function is where the power of this program shines.  You
can create 10 different sets of songs that are accessible by the
function keys, while the program is running.

	The function keys can be used to switch between the set files. 
The files 'PERFORM1.SET' to 'PERFORM9.SET' are loaded with the F1 to F9
keys.  'PERFORM0.SET'  is the set normally loaded on start up, and is
also selectable by pressing the F10 key.

	You may want to create a different 'SET' file for different
styles of music.   (F1=Rock, F2=Jazz, F3=Slow songs, etc.. ) or a
mixture of songs in a set.

	In normal mode, the number of songs in a SET file is limited by
your RAM space.  All songs in a set are loaded at once so you may have
instant access to any of them at any time.  If you want, you may select
the option 'LOAD SINGLE SONGS' with the configuration editor program. 
With this option set to 'YES', a song is only loaded into RAM when you
first select it, and is removed from RAM when you select another song. 


 

The Set Editor Program (SET_EDIT.PRG)

	With the Set Editor program you can create up to ten different
'SET' files.  Each 'SET' file is a list of up to 1000 songs in any
order.  The Pro MIDI Player program switches between the 'SET' files
when you press the function keys F1 to F10.
	
	To run the Set Editor program, double click on 'SET_EDIT.PRG'
from the desktop and a window will open showing you our copyright and
address.  Click on the 'OK' button and the set editor window will open.

Creating a Set File
	
	Once the Set Editor program is running, you will see a list of
all the songs that are in your SONGS folder alphabetically.  On the
left is a list of songs in the current set. 

	On the far left is a list of all the possible 'SET' files on
your hard disk,  'PERFORM0.SET' to 'PERFORM9.SET'.  The default set
file 'PERFORM0.SET' is automatically highlighted and loaded.

	To assemble your set, simply click the mouse on the song that
you want to go first.  The song name will appear in the first location
in your set, and the next location in your set is highlighted. 
Continue placing songs in your set as you choose.

	NOTE:  If you want to chain play songs in a specific order,
they must be consecutive in your set list.

	If you make a mistake and you want to change the location of a
song, click on the position you want to add or delete, and it will
become highlighted.  To delete that song from that position in your set
file, press the 'Delete' button.  To insert a song, click on the song
name.  The song will be inserted at the selected position in your set.

	When you have completed construction of your first set, click
the 'Save' button.  Your set file will automatically be saved as your
default set.

	To create more sets, select the set file you want to edit from
the far left of the screen.  The set file will automatically be loaded.
 


The Configuration Editor Program (CFG_EDIT.PRG)

	The configuration editor program modifies the file PERFORM.CFG.
 This file must be present to run the player program.  This file
contains information for the player program about how you want to
control it.

Creating a Configuration file

	Double click on the CFG_EDIT.PRG file and our address will come
up on the screen.  Click on the OK button and the configuration window
will open.

	On the left hand side there is a disk drive list.  To load a
configuration file from a different disk drive, just click on the
desired drive letter.  

	In the middle of the screen are three areas: 'INPUT', 'OUTPUT',
and 'OTHER'.  The 'INPUT' area contains parameters that affect how the
Pro MIDI Player program is controlled by you.  The 'OUTPUT' area
contains parameters that affect how the Pro MIDI Player program
notifies you.  The 'OTHER' area contains other settings for the Pro
MIDI Player.

	At the bottom of the screen are the three buttons labelled
LOAD, SAVE, and EXIT:

*	Press the LOAD button to load or reload the configuration file
on the selected disk drive.

*	Press the SAVE button to save the current configuration file on
the selected disk drive.

*	Press the EXIT button to exit the program.  If you have
modified the current configuration file, the program will ask you if
you want to save it first.

Input Commands

	The Pro MIDI Player program can be controlled by a number of
different sources.  You can select and play songs with your computer
keyboard, your master MIDI keyboard or footswitch, or even a homemade
footswitch connected to the joystick inputs of your computer.




External Control Channel

	If you want to use an external MIDI device to control the Pro
MIDI Player,  set this field to that MIDI channel that you wish to use.
 If you do not wish to control the Pro MIDI Player with a MIDI device,
then set this field to 'NONE'.

External Control Type

PG-1:
	PG-1 mode causes the Pro MIDI Player to respond to the
following MIDI program change messages on the control channel:

	#1 (#A11 on some synths) = Go to next song
	#2 (#A12 on some synths) = Go to previous song
	#3 (#A13 on some synths) = Play current song
	#4 (#A14 on some synths) = Stop playing. 

PG-125:
	PG-125 mode causes the Pro MIDI Player to respond to the
following MIDI program change messages on the control channel:

	#125 (#B85 on some synths) = Go to next song
	#126 (#B86 on some synths) = Go to previous song
	#127 (#B87 on some synths) = Play current song
	#128 (#B88 on some synths) = Stop playing.

PG ALL:
	PG ALL mode causes the Pro MIDI Player to select the song that
corresponds to the program change # that was pressed.  If you select
sound #1 (or #A11 on some synths) then SONG #1 will be selected.  

	To start a song playing with PG ALL set, send controller #65
(Portamento switch) on from your master keyboard.

HOLD:

	HOLD mode lets you start the current song with a hold pedal on
message (controller #64) on your master keyboard.

PORTA:

	PORTA mode lets you start the current song with a 'Portamento
on' message (controller #65).



Use Joystick

	The Atari ST computer has a joystick port which can be
connected to a number of switches as a low cost footswitch controller
for the Pro MIDI Player program.  The port that is used is the
dedicated joystick port, not the dual mouse/joystick port.  The
switches should be the momentary, normally open type, except for the
'DP-2' mode.

This field currently has three settings: 'No', 'Yes', and 'DP-2'.
	
NO:
	Select this setting if you are not using the joystick port for
external control.

YES:
	If you select this setting, the joystick controls will be
enabled for all five joystick buttons.  The buttons have the following
functions:

	UP 	= Unhang (all notes off)
	DOWN 	= Pause
	LEFT 	= Previous song
	RIGHT 	= Next song
	FIRE 	= Play current song.


DP-2:
	The 'DP-2' mode is made especially for a momentary normally
closed type switch like the Roland DP-2 footswitch.  This mode only
allows one footswitch to be connected to the Atari's joystick FIRE
button input.  With this mode, pressing the DP-2 switch will start a
song playing.  


Output Settings

	This feature is for players who do not want to use a computer
monitor on stage and want to have their song name displayed on their
LCD of their synth.  We have implemented several MIDI synths already,
but if you are using a synth that supports this type of SYSEX message
and is not in the display type option, send us your MIDI implementation
chart and we will write it in for a $40.00 (CAN) fee if it can be done.


Display Channel / Unit #:

	Set this field to the MIDI channel (or unit #) of the MIDI
device that you will be using to display the current song with.  If you
are not using this feature, set this field to 'NONE'.  Some devices
like the MT-32 or D-110 respond to a Unit # and not a MIDI channel. 
Unit #'s can range from 0 to 31.

Display Type:

	Set this field to the type of keyboard or sound module that you
have.  Not all synths are implemented, but more are being added all the
time.  If you do not use this feature set this field to 'NONE'.

Other Settings

MIDI Thru:

	This field can be set to 'NO', 'ALL', or from 1 to 16.  

	When it is set to 'NO', MIDI In data is not send out the MIDI
Out port.  This is useful when you do not have a master keyboard and
you only use the MIDI In port to control the Pro MIDI Player.

	When it is set to 'ALL', all non-sysex MIDI In data is
immediately sent out the MIDI Out port without being re-channelized. 
This is the most used option.  This is useful when you have a master
keyboard and you use the it to play your sound modules through the
computer.

	When it is set to a channel number from 1 to 16 the Pro MIDI
Player program will re-channelize the incoming MIDI In data to the
specified channel and then send it out.  This is useful when you have a
synth that you are using as a master keyboard, but the synth does not
have the capability to send MIDI data on a different MIDI channel that
it is set to receive on.

Pause After Exclusive:

	If you are using the System Exclusive bulk dump sending
features of the Pro MIDI Player, this field may be set to 'YES' or
'NO'.

	If it is set to 'NO', the Pro MIDI Player will start playing
the selected song immediately after the sys-ex is sent.  

	If you set this field to 'YES', the Pro MIDI Player will send
the sys-ex and then go into pause mode, waiting for you to press PLAY
again to actually start playing the music.  This option is useful when
your sys-ex dumps take a while to send and you want to precisely
control the starting time of your song.

Load Single Songs:

	When this field is set to 'NO', the Pro MIDI Player will be in
standard mode.  In standard mode, the Pro MIDI Player reads an entire
set of songs into RAM on startup and when you select a new set.  This
means that all the songs in a set will be instantly accessible, but the
number of songs that can be in a set is limited by your available RAM. 
This option is the recommended setting when your computer does not have
a hard disk.

	When this field is set to 'YES', the Pro MIDI Player will only
load in a song when it is currently selected.  This means that you can
switch between sets very quickly and the number of songs in a set is
not limited by available RAM.  However, when you select a new song it
will take a few seconds to be loaded into memory.  This option is the
recommended setting when your computer has a hard disk and can access
the files very fast.

Internal Control Channel:

	This is one of the newest features of the Pro MIDI Player.  Not
only can you sequence your music, but you can sequence commands to the
Pro MIDI Player as well!  The sequenced commands take the form of
standard MIDI control change messages.  The Internal Control Channel
field selects the MIDI channel that you will use for these control
change messages.  If you do not want to use this feature of the Pro
MIDI Player, set the Internal Control Channel field to 'OFF'.

	When the Pro MIDI Player encounters an Internal Control message
on the proper MIDI channel,  the Pro MIDI Player will perform the
desired function and will NOT send the control change message out the
MIDI out port  Any other MIDI messages on the Internal Control Channel
will play played normally.  This means that the Internal Control
Channel may be set to a MIDI channel that is being used for music at
the same time.

	To place Internal Control Messages into your sequence, the
sequencer program that you use to edit the songs must have an event
editing feature. You need to be able to type in the exact MIDI control
change message that you need at the exact time in your sequence.  

	These Internal Control Messages are only read from the MIDI
file that is currently playing, not from the MIDI In port of your
computer.

	Currently there are 3 types of commands.  These are:

	*	Start Loop/End Loop (Controller 61)
	*	Automatic Pause (Controller 62)
	*	Automatic Text Page Selection (Controller 63)

Start Loop/End Loop (Controller 61)

	A 'Start Loop' message is a MIDI control change 61, value 0.
	An 'End Loop' message is a MIDI control change 61, value 1.

	The looping features of the Pro MIDI Player are very powerful. 
How many times have you been playing at a gig with a sequencer
supplying the backing tracks and wished that you could just
spontaneously repeat the last chorus again?

	With the 'Start Loop' and 'End Loop' internal commands you can
do this live!  First, you must figure out exactly where in your song
you may want to loop.  The starting point of your loop must be marked
with a 'Start Loop' message, and the ending point of your loop must be
marked with an 'End Loop' message in your MIDI file.

	If you press 'Play' while playing music between the start and
end message, the Pro MIDI Player program will jump directly to the
'Start Loop' time in the song as soon as it gets to the 'End Loop'
time.  If you do not press 'Play' during this time, the Pro MIDI Player
will not loop. You may loop as many times as you want.

	The 'Start Loop' message and the 'End Loop' message may be
placed at ANY position in the song.  They do not have to be at measure
end or measure start boundaries.  You will want to place them both in
the same position within the measure, though. 

	You MUST make sure that there are no MIDI note on messages
going across an End Loop point.  The Pro MIDI Player jumps directly
from the 'End Loop' point to the 'Start Loop' point, and if there are
any notes still on they will be stuck on until you press 'Unhang' or
the loop ends.  Careful selection of the start and end points will make
a good loop.
	
Automatic Pause (Controller 62)

	The Automatic Pause message is MIDI control change #62, value
0.

	If you place an Automatic Pause message into your sequence
file,  the Pro MIDI Player will automatically go into pause mode at
that point.  To continue playing you must press 'Play'.

	This is useful in live performance.   For instance the intro,
middle section or ending of a song could be non-sequenced, played in
real time for as long as you want.  The Pro MIDI Player will pause
automatically and will wait for you to press play to continue the song.


	Any MIDI notes left on before an automatic pause message will
be left on.  This may be useful if you want the notes to be held during
the pause.  If you do not want notes to be held during the pause, you
must make sure all the notes are shut off in your sequence before the
automatic pause message.  

	Although you may put the automatic pause message at any point
within a measure, I suggest you place it 1 clock before the start of a
measure.  This way, when you press 'Play' to continue it will continue
at the start of the measure.


Automatic Text Page Selection (Controller 63)

	With the text page selection message, the Pro MIDI Player can
automatically flip to a specific page of lyrics at certain points in
the song.

	The text page selection message is MIDI control change #63. 
The value of this MIDI control change specifies the page number that
you want to switch to.  Because the MIDI control change values start at
0, so does the text page number.  This means that controller 63, value
0 will show the first text page, and controller 63, value 1 will show
the second text page.

	You may still use the manual text page selection keys (up arrow
and down arrow) at the same time.




The Sys-ex recorder program (REC_EXCL.PRG)


	This feature is for the people who want to have the Pro MIDI
Player re-program their synth modules for each song.  Most people will
not want to do this, but some people prefer to have a separate bank of
sounds for each song.  The REC_EXCL.PRG program enables you to store
MIDI system exclusive messages from your MIDI modules on your
computer's disk for each song.  The Pro MIDI Player program can then
send out the MIDI system exclusive data when you play your song.

	To run the REC_EXCL.PRG program, double click on the
'REC_EXCL.PRG' icon.  A title screen will pop up.  Click on 'OK' to
continue.

	The program is quite simple.  If you press the 'EXIT' button,
the program will end and return you to the desktop.  If you press the
'RECORD' button, the program will start recording incoming sysex.
 
	Once you press the 'RECORD' button, you must then send all the
sysex messages to your computer for the one song.  You may send
multiple messages from different devices.  Currently the REC_EXCL
program will not request sysex from your modules. You must manually
initiate bulk dumps 

	Once you are finished sending the sysex for the one song, press
the spacebar key on your computer.  A file box will open and prompt you
for a file name for the sysex data.  Type in the file name of your song
file with the extension 'EXC'.  For example, if your song's file name
was 'TWIST.MID', you would save the sysex for it in the file
'TWIST.EXC'.

	Once the 'EXC' file is saved in your songs folder with your
'MID' file, the Pro MIDI Player will automtically load and send the
sysex when you press play.  If you have the 'Pause after sys-ex' option
(in the configuration editor program) set to 'YES', then the Pro MIDI
Player will automatically go into pause mode after the sysex is sent so
you may start the song exactly when you want.  This is useful if your
sysex takes a few seconds the send.



The Player Program (PLAYER.TOS)

	The Player program 'PLAYER.TOS' is the program that you will
run when you are on stage performing.

Starting PLAYER.TOS

	The Player program can be run from the desktop by double
clicking on the file 'PLAYER.TOS'.  If you do not have a hard disk, you
may place it into an 'AUTO' folder on a floppy disk and rename it to
'PLAYER.PRG'.  The computer will automatically start the Player program
on boot up.

	The 'PLAYER.TOS' program is already inside the AUTO folder on
your disk!  To have it automatically run on boot up, just rename it to
'PLAYER.PRG'.

	When the Player program is run it will first look for the
'PERFORM.CFG' file.  If this file is not on your disk, it will abort. 
If it is on your disk, as it should be, it will then search for a
PERFORM0.SET file.  If this file is not on your disk, the program will
create a set of its own from the song files in the 'SONGS' folder.

	If a file in your set is not on the disk, or if there is a disk
error while loading a file, the program will prompt you to 'SWAP
DISKS'.  This will give you an opportunity to swap floppy disks.  Press
'Play' to try loading the file again.  The program will try 3 times to
load in a file.  If all 3 tries fail, then the song is marked as bad
with an asterisk (*) and will not be playable.

Text Files
	
	The Pro MIDI Player program can display text files while
playing songs.  The text files can contain lyrics, chord charts, or
whatever else you want.  The text files must be pure ASCII text files
with the filename having a 'TXT' extension.

	To associate a text file with a song file, the text file must
have the same base name as the song file but with the 'TXT' extension. 
For example if your song's file name was 'RUNNING.MID', you would save
your lyrics in a file named 'RUNNING.TXT'.  

	The text files can have multiple pages of text. One page of
text is considered to be 23 lines. You may switch between pages of text
with the up arrow and down arrow while the music is playing.  You can
also set up your sequence to automatically change pages for you at
specific points in your song. 

	When the Pro MIDI Player program is loading songs from the disk
it automatically searches for and loads the associated text files.
  

System Exclusive Files

	You may want your synths to be reprogrammed with different
sounds for each song that you play.  You can do this with system
exclusive files.  

	Every song in your set may have an associated system exclusive
file that was recorded with the 'REC_EXCL.PRG' program.  A system
exclusive file name has the extension 'EXC'.  

	To associate a system exclusive file with a song file, the
sys-ex file must have the same base name as the song file but with the
'EXC' extension.  For example if your song's file name was
'RUNNING.MID', you would save your system exclusive's in a file named
'RUNNING.EXC'.  

	Whenever you go to play a song that has associated sys-ex, the
sys-ex will be sent out immediately when you press play.  

	If you have set the 'Pause after Sys-Ex' option to 'NO' in the
configuration file, then as soon as the sys-ex is sent your song will
play.

	If you have set the 'Pause after Sys-Ex' option to 'YES',
however, as soon as the sys-ex is sent, the program immediately goes
into pause mode, waiting for you to press play again to start the song
playing.  You will want to use this option if the sys-ex that you send
takes a long time to transfer.

	


Live Performance Commands

	You can use the following commands from the computer keyboard
to control the Pro MIDI Player during a live performance:

KEY	FUNCTION

'spacebar'
	PLAY (while stopped)
	STOP (while playing)
	DO LOOP (while playing a loop section)

	When stopped, it starts playing the current song.
	When playing a song, it stops playing the song.
	When playing a song and the display says 'LOOP?',  it turns the
loop on.

'Up-Arrow'
	SELECT PREVIOUS SONG (while stopped)
	SELECT PREVIOUS TEXT PAGE (while playing)

'Down-Arrow'
	SELECT NEXT SONG (while stopped)
	SELECT NEXT TEXT PAGE (while playing)

'Left-Arrow'
	SELECT SONG IN PREVIOUS COLUMN (while stopped)

'Right-Arrow'
	SELECT SONG IN NEXT COLUMN (while stopped)

',' (comma)
	DECREASE TEMPO (while playing)

	Pressing this key repeatedly will slow down the song that is
playing.  You may also hold the key down to decrease the tempo rapidly.


'.' (period)
	INCREASE TEMPO (while playing)

	Pressing this key repeatedly will speed up the song that is
playing.  You may also hold the key down to increase the tempo rapidly.


'U'
	UNHANG

	Send all notes off to unhang stuck notes.  This function works
while stopped or while playing a song.



'A'
	ABORT

	Stop playing current song.  Can stop a song while playing a
loop section.



'L'
	LOAD

	Create a set that consists of all the songs in the current
SONGS folder.


'P'
	PAUSE (while playing)

	Pauses playing.  Shuts off all notes before pausing.  Press
'spacebar' to continue playing.


'HELP'
	HELP (while stopped)

	Show a help screen which displays a short list of all these
commands.  Press 'spacebar' to continue.


Song #,'Enter'
	SELECT NEW SONG (while stopped)

	Go to another song directly by entering the song number and
pressing the 'Enter' key or the 'Return' key.


'\' (backslash)
	START CONTINUOUS PLAYBACK (while stopped)
	STOP CONTINUOUS PLAYBACK (while playing)

	Pressing the backslash key when no song is playing will start
the current song playing.  When the current song stops playing the next
song will start playing as soon as possible.

	If you press the backslash key while a song is playing, then
the continuous playback function will stop at the end of the current
song. 

F1-F10	LOAD NEW SET FILE (while stopped)
	Pressing the function keys F1 to F10 will load the associated
set file from disk ( 'PERFORM1.SET' to 'PERFORM9.SET', F10 selects
'PERFORM0.SET').  'PERFORM0.SET' is the default set that is loaded on
start up.
	

	You can also control the Pro MIDI Player from your MIDI
Keyboard.  See the 'Configuration Editor' section in this manual for
information on external and internal control.

Notes on MIDI Files

	Standard MIDI Files are a program independent and computer
independent way of storing MIDI information and sequences.  There are
currently three types of Standard MIDI Files; type 0, type 1, and type
2.  

MIDI 0 Files

	MIDI 0 Files are the most simple type of MIDI Files.  They
contain a single track of multi channel MIDI Information.

	Almost all current sequencer programs can read and write type 0
files, and the Pro MIDI Player program requires that your song files
are type 0.

MIDI 1 Files

	MIDI 1 Files are a bit more complex in that they can contain
multiple tracks of multi channel MIDI information.  Track #0 is
reserved for tempo events and time signature events.  

	Most sequencer programs that support multiple tracks can import
and export MIDI 1 Files.  Since the Pro MIDI Player program requires
MIDI 0 Files, you must make sure that the file you are saving is type 0
and not type 1.  Some sequencer programs will only export MIDI 0 files
if you merge all the tracks into one track before you select 'export'. 
Other programs will do this automatically when you export to type 0
files.

MIDI 2 Files

	MIDI 2 Files are much more complex in that they can contain
multiple independent multi channel MIDI sequences.  Each sequence has
its own tempo events and time signature events.  Track #0 is reserved
for events that specify which sequence to start playing at specific
times.

	Few sequencer programs support this type of pattern based
recording.





We do not know of any situations where this program has caused the loss
of any data or files, however for legal reasons, we must include the
following disclaimer:


This software is provided 'as is' without a warranty of any kind,
either expressed or implied, including, but not limited to, the implied
warranties of merchantability and fitness for a particular purpose. 
The entire risk as to quality and performance of the system is with
you. 


Pro MIDI Systems and J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd., does not warranty
that the functions contained in the system will meet your requirements
or that the operation of the system will be uninterrupted or error
free.  Pro MIDI Systems and J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd. will from
time to time, revise the performance of the system and in doing so,
incur no obligation to furnish such revisions too you.


However, Pro MIDI Systems and J.D. Koftinoff Software, Ltd. warrants
the diskette and dongle to be free from defects in materials and 
workmanship under normal use for a period of 90 days from the date of
delivery to you as evidenced by a copy of your receipt. 


In no event will Pro MIDI Systems be liable to you for any damages, 
including lost profits, savings, or other incidental or consequential
damages arising out of the use, or inability to use this system. 

