     BOOTEDIT
     ========

     Some Comments

     This is yet another auto folder program and accessory selector.  When I 
     started  this project in 1987,  there were not many of this  kind.  And 
     since  then  this  program has hardly ever changed.  Now  there  are  a 
     couple  of  powerful  boot  selectors (and at  least  one  of  them  is 
     commercial). But this one is still useful in its simplicity.

     You  can  copy this program and it's source (written in  TDI  Modula-2) 
     for free,  but you should not make any profit of it.  --- How can  this 
     be done anyway?  --- If you change anything, you should change at least 
     the  version  number and the copyright notice too.  But  feel  free  to 
     improve  this  little  utility for your own needs.  If  you  like  this 
     program,  I'd  be happy to hear some comments from you.  My address  is 
     listed below.

     How To Use It

     Like all these utilities,  this program should be the first program  in 
     your  auto  folder sequence.  (Copy it as the first  program  into  the 
     empty auto folder.) Then while booting a small notice with a beep  asks 
     you  to start the utility with a keypress (or mouse movement).  If  you 
     don't  react within about one second the program  quits.  Otherwise  it 
     displays  a  list of your accessories and  auto  programs.  All  active 
     programs  (that will be started) are marked with an asterisk.  Use  the 
     cursor  keys or mouse to move the inverted bar to a  specific  program. 
     You  can  change its state (active or not) by  pressing  either  space, 
     return or the left mouse button.  To finish the program select the okay 
     button  the  same  way  as  you would  select  a  program.  As  a  fast 
     alternative you can press the right mouse button to exit.  That's  all. 
     Simple, isn't it.

     Restrictions

     - Only the first 36 accessories and auto programs are shown and can  be 
     selected.
     - The concept to find the accessories is not so smart.  If the  current 
     drive is a or b and drive c exists,  it searches the accessories in the 
     root directory of drive c.  Otherwise the current drive is  used.  This 
     has  be  done this way for those people who load  the  harddisk  driver 
     from floppy disk.
     - The screen will not look very nice in resolutions other than 80 *  25 
     characters, but it should work on any resolution at least that big.
     - If  you  don't enter BOOTEDIT,  you waste one second every  time  you 
     boot,  but this is the way the program is designed to avoid conflicting 
     combinations of shift, control, alternate.
     - It cannot deal with desktop.inf,  assign.sys and other  configuration 
     files modern boot selectors can treat.

     My Address

     (Postcards and PD programs are welcome.)

     Remo Hofer
     Oetlingerstrasse 1
     CH-4057 Basel
     Switzerland

     E-mail

     RFC822:  <hofer@urz.unibas.ch> or <hofer%urz.unibas.ch@cernvax.bitnet>
     X.400:  S=hofer;OU=urz;O=unibas;P=SWITCH;A=ARCOM;C=CH
     HEPNET/SPAN:  CHGATE::YOGI::HOFER or 20579::48130::HOFER
