                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


                          THE STDIO.H HEADER FILE

             Load  the file SIMPLEIO.C for our first look at a  file 
        with  standard I/O.   Standard I/O refers to the most  usual 
        places  where  data is either read from,  the  keyboard,  or 
        written to, the video monitor.  Since they are used so much, 
        they are used as the default I/O devices and do not need  to 
        be  named in the Input/Output instructions.   This will make 
        more  sense when we actually start to use them so lets  look 
        at the file in front of you.

             The  first thing you will notice is the first  line  of 
        the  file,  the #include "stdio.h" line.   This is very much 
        like  the  #define  we have  already  studied,  except  that 
        instead of a simple substitution,  an entire file is read in 
        at  this  point.   The  system  will  find  the  file  named 
        "stdio.h"  and read its entire contents in,  replacing  this 
        statement.   Obviously then,  the file named "stdio.h"  must 
        contain  valid  C source statements that can be compiled  as 
        part  of  a program.   This particular file is  composed  of 
        several standard #defines to define some of the standard I/O 
        operations.   The file is called a header file and you  will 
        find several different header files on the source disks that 
        came  with  your compiler.   Each of the header files has  a 
        specific  purpose and any or all of them can be included  in 
        any program.

             Most C compilers use the double quote marks to indicate 
        that  the  "include"  file  will be  found  in  the  current 
        directory.   A  few use the "less than" and  "greater  than" 
        signs  to indicate that the file will be found in a standard 
        header  file.   Nearly all MSDOS C compilers use the  double 
        quotes,  and  most require the "include" file to be  in  the 
        default  directory.   All  of the programs in this  tutorial 
        have the double quotes in the "include" statements.  If your 
        compiler  uses the other notation,  you will have to  change 
        them before compiling.

                        INPUT/OUTPUT OPERATIONS IN C

             Actually  the  C programming language has no  input  or 
        output operations defined as part of the language, they must 
        be user defined.   Since everybody does not want to reinvent 
        his  own input and output operations,  the compiler  writers 
        have done a lot of this for us and supplied us with  several 
        input  functions and several output functions to aid in  our 
        program development.   The functions have become a standard, 
        and  you  will find the same functions available  in  nearly 
        every  compiler.   In fact,  the industry standard of the  C 
        language  definition has become the book written by Kernigan 
        and Ritchie, and they have included these functions in their 


                                  Page 55









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        definition.   You will often,  when reading literature about 
        C,  find  a  reference to K & R.   This refers to  the  book 
        written  by Kernigan and Ritchie.   You would be advised  to 
        purchase a copy for reference.

             You should print out the file named "stdio.h" and spend 
        some  time studying it.   There will be a lot that you  will 
        not understand about it, but parts of it will look familiar.  
        The  name  "stdio.h"  is  sort  of  cryptic  for   "standard 
        input/output header",  because that is exactly what it does.  
        It  defines  the standard input and output functions in  the 
        form of #defines and macros.  Don't worry too much about the 
        details  of this now.   You can always return to this  topic 
        later  for  more study if it interests  you,  but  you  will 
        really  have no need to completely understand the  "stdio.h" 
        file.  You will have a tremendous need to use it however, so 
        these comments on its use and purpose are necessary.

                            OTHER INCLUDE FILES

             When  you  begin writing larger programs and  splitting 
        them  up into separately compiled portions,  you  will  have 
        occasion  to  use  some  statements common to  each  of  the 
        portions.   It would be to your advantage to make a separate 
        file  containing  the  statements and use  the  #include  to 
        insert it into each of the files.  If you want to change any 
        of the common statements,  you will only need to change  one 
        file  and  you will be assured of having all of  the  common 
        statements  agree.   This  is  getting  a  little  ahead  of 
        ourselves  but  you  now  have  an  idea  how  the  #include 
        directive can be used.

                    BACK TO THE FILE NAMED "SIMPLEIO.C"
             
             Lets  continue our tour of the file in  question.   The 
        one  variable  "c" is defined and a message is  printed  out 
        with the familiar "printf" function.  We then find ourselves 
        in  a continuous loop as long as "c" is not equal to capital 
        X.   If  there is any question in your mind about  the  loop 
        control, you should review chapter 3 before continuing.  The 
        two  new functions within the loop are of paramount interest 
        in this program since they are the new functions.  These are 
        functions to read a character from the keyboard and  display 
        it on the monitor one character at a time.

             The  function "getchar()" reads a single character from 
        the  standard  input  device,  the  keyboard  being  assumed 
        because that is the standard input device, and assigns it to 
        the variable "c".   The next function "putchar(c)", uses the 
        standard output device,  the video monitor,  and outputs the 
        character contained in the variable "c".   The character  is 


                                  Page 56









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        output  at  the  current cursor location and the  cursor  is 
        advanced  one space for the next character.   The system  is 
        therefore taking care of a lot of the overhead for us.   The 
        loop  continues reading and displaying characters  until  we 
        type a capital X which terminates the loop. 

             Compile and run this program for a few surprises.  When 
        you type on the keyboard, you will notice that what you type 
        is displayed faithfully on the screen,  and when you hit the 
        return key,  the entire line is repeated.   In fact, we only 
        told  it  to output each character once but it seems  to  be 
        saving  the  characters up and redisplaying them.   A  short 
        explanation is in order.

               DOS IS HELPING US OUT (OR GETTING IN THE WAY)

             We need to understand a little bit about how DOS  works 
        to  understand  what is happening here.   When data is  read 
        from  the keyboard,  under DOS control,  the characters  are 
        stored  in  a buffer until a carriage return is  entered  at 
        which  time the entire string of characters is given to  the 
        program.   When the characters are being typed, however, the 
        characters are displayed one at a time on the monitor.  This 
        is called echo,  and happens in many of the applications you 
        run. 

             With  the above paragraph in mind,  it should be  clear 
        that when you are typing a line of data into "SIMPLEIO", the 
        characters are being echoed by DOS,  and when you return the 
        carriage,  the characters are given to the program.  As each 
        character  is given to the program,  it displays it  on  the 
        screen  resulting  in  a repeat of the line  typed  in.   To 
        better  illustrate  this,  type  a line  with  a  capital  X 
        somewhere  in the middle of the line.   You can type as many 
        characters  as you like following the "X" and they will  all 
        display because the characters are being read in under  DOS, 
        echoed  to the monitor,  and placed in the DOS input buffer.  
        DOS doesn't think there is anything special about a  capital 
        X.   When the string is given to the program,  however,  the 
        characters  are  accepted by the program one at a  time  and 
        sent  to  the monitor one at a time,  until a capital  X  is 
        encountered.   After the capital X is displayed, the loop is 
        terminated,  and the program is terminated.   The characters 
        on  the input line following the capital X are not displayed 
        because the capital X signalled program termination.

             Compile  and  run  "SIMPLEIO.C".    After  running  the 
        program  several  times  and  feeling  confidant  that   you 
        understand  the above explanation,  we will go on to another 
        program.



                                  Page 57









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


             Don't  get  discouraged by the  above  seemingly  weird 
        behavior  of the I/O system.   It is strange,  but there are 
        other ways to get data into the computer.  You will actually 
        find the above method useful for many applications,  and you 
        will probably find some of the following useful also.

                         ANOTHER STRANGE I/O METHOD

             Load  the file named SINGLEIO.C and display it on  your 
        monitor for another method of character I/O.  Once again, we 
        start  with  the  standard I/O  header  file,  we  define  a 
        variable named "c",  and we print a welcoming message.  Like 
        the  last  program,  we are in a loop that will continue  to 
        execute  until  we type a capital X,  but the  action  is  a 
        little different here.

             The  "getch()"  is  a  new  function  that  is  a  "get 
        character" function.  It differs from "getchar()" in that it 
        does  not  get tied up in DOS.   It reads the  character  in 
        without echo, and puts it directly into the program where it 
        is  operated  on immediately.   This function then  reads  a 
        character,  immediately  displays  it  on  the  screen,  and 
        continues the operation until a capital X is typed.

             When  you compile and run this program,  you will  find 
        that there is no repeat of the lines when you hit a carriage 
        return,  and  when  you  hit  the  capital  X,  the  program 
        terminates immediately.  No carriage return is needed to get 
        it to accept the line with the X in it.   We do have another 
        problem here, there is no linefeed with the carriage return.

                          NOW WE NEED A LINE FEED

             It  is not apparent to you in most application programs 
        but  when  you hit the enter key,  the  program  supplies  a 
        linefeed to go with the carriage return.  You need to return 
        to  the  left side of the monitor and you also need to  drop 
        down  a line.   The linefeed is not automatic.  We  need  to 
        improve  our program to do this also.   If you will load and 
        display the program named BETTERIN.C, you will find a change 
        to incorporate this feature.

             In BETTERIN.C, we have two additional statements at the 
        beginning  that  will  define the character  codes  for  the 
        linefeed (LF), and the carriage return (CR).  If you look at 
        any  ASCII table you will find that the codes 10 and 13  are 
        exactly  as  defined  here.   In  the  main  program,  after 
        outputting the character,  we compare it to CR, and if it is 
        equal to CR,  we also output a linefeed which is the LF.  We 
        could  have  just  as well have left  out  the  two  #define 
        statements and used "if (c == 13) putchar(10);" but it would 


                                  Page 58









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        not  be  very descriptive of what we are  doing  here.   The 
        method  used  in the program represents  better  programming 
        practice.

             Compile  and  run BETTERIN.C to see if it does what  we 
        have said it should do.   It should display exactly what you 
        type in, including a linefeed with each carriage return, and 
        should stop immediately when you type a capital X. 

             If  you are using a nonstandard compiler,  it  may  not 
        find  a "CR" because your system returns a "LF" character to 
        indicate  end-of-line.   It will be up to you  to  determine 
        what method your compiler uses.   The quickest way is to add 
        a  "printf"  statement  that prints the input  character  in 
        decimal format.

                           WHICH METHOD IS BEST?

             We have examined two methods of reading characters into 
        a  C program,  and are faced with a choice of which  one  we 
        should  use.   It really depends on the application  because 
        each  method has advantages and disadvantages.   Lets take a 
        look at each. 

             When using the first method,  DOS is actually doing all 
        of  the  work for us by storing the characters in  an  input 
        buffer and signalling us when a full line has been  entered.  
        We  could write a program that,  for example,  did a lot  of 
        calculations,  then  went to get some input.   While we were 
        doing the calculations,  DOS would be accumulating a line of 
        characters  for  us,  and they would be there when  we  were 
        ready  for  them.   However,  we could not  read  in  single 
        keystrokes   because  DOS  would  not  report  a  buffer  of 
        characters to us until it recognized a carriage return.

             The second method, used in BETTERIN.C, allows us to get 
        a single character,  and act on it immediately.   We do  not 
        have  to  wait  until  DOS decides we can  have  a  line  of 
        characters.  We cannot do anything else while we are waiting 
        for  a  character  because  we are  waiting  for  the  input 
        keystroke  and tying up the entire machine.   This method is 
        useful  for highly interactive types of program  interfaces.  
        It  is up to you as the programmer to decide which  is  best 
        for your needs.

             I  should  mention at this point that there is also  an 
        "ungetch" function that works with the "getch" function.  If 
        you "getch" a character and find that you have gone one  too 
        far,  you  can "ungetch" it back to the input device.   This 
        simplifies  some  programs because you don't know  that  you 
        don't  want the character until you get it.   You  can  only 


                                  Page 59









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        "ungetch"  one character back to the input device,  but that 
        is  sufficient  to  accomplish the task  this  function  was 
        designed for.   It is difficult to demonstrate this function 
        in  a simple program so its use will be up to you  to  study 
        when you need it.

             The discussion so far in this chapter, should be a good 
        indication  that,  while the C programming language is  very 
        flexible,  it does put a lot of responsibility on you as the 
        programmer to keep many details in mind.

                        NOW TO READ IN SOME INTEGERS

             Load  and display the file named INTIN.C for an example 
        of  reading in some formatted data.   The structure of  this 
        program  is  very similar to the last three except  that  we 
        define  an "int" type variable and loop until  the  variable 
        somehow acquires the value of 100.

             Instead of reading in a character at a time, as we have 
        in the last three files,  we read in an entire integer value 
        with  one  call  using the  function  named  "scanf".   This 
        function  is very similar to the "printf" that you have been 
        using for quite some time by now except that it is used  for 
        input instead of output.   Examine the line with the "scanf" 
        and  you  will notice that it does not ask for the  variable 
        "valin"  directly,  but  gives the address of  the  variable 
        since it expects to have a value returned from the function.  
        Recall  that a function must have the address of a  variable 
        in  order  to  return  the value  to  the  calling  program.  
        Failing  to  supply  a pointer in the  "scanf"  function  is 
        probably  the most common problem encountered in using  this 
        function. 

             The  function  "scanf" scans the input  line  until  it 
        finds  the first data field.   It ignores leading blanks and 
        in this case,  it reads integer characters until it finds  a 
        blank  or  an invalid decimal character,  at which  time  it 
        stops reading and returns the value. 

             Remembering  our discussion above about the way the DOS 
        input  buffer  works,  it should be clear  that  nothing  is 
        actually acted on until a complete line is entered and it is 
        terminated by a carriage return.   At this time,  the buffer 
        is  input,  and  our  program will search  across  the  line 
        reading  all  integer values it can find until the  line  is 
        completely scanned.  This is because we are in a loop and we 
        tell it to find a value,  print it,  find another, print it, 
        etc.   If you enter several values on one line, it will read 
        each one in succession and display the values.  Entering the 
        value  of  100  will cause the  program  to  terminate,  and 


                                  Page 60









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        entering  the  value 100 with other values  following,  will 
        cause   termination   before  the   following   values   are 
        considered. 

                      IT MAKES WRONG ANSWERS SOMETIMES

             If  you  enter a number up to and including  32767,  it 
        will display correctly, but if you enter a larger number, it 
        will appear to make an error.  For example, if you enter the 
        value 32768,  it will display the value of -32768,  entering 
        the  value  65536 will display as a  zero.   These  are  not 
        errors but are caused by the way an integer is defined.  The 
        most significant bit of the 16 bit pattern available for the 
        integer variable is the sign bit,  so there are only 15 bits 
        left  for the value.   The variable can therefore only  have 
        the  values  from  -32768 to 32767,  any  other  values  are 
        outside  the range of integer variables.   This is up to you 
        to take care of in your programs.   It is another example of 
        the increased responsibility you must assume using C  rather 
        than a higher level language such as Pascal, Modula-2, etc.

             The   above  paragraph  is  true  for  most  MS-DOS   C 
        compilers.   There  is  a very small possibility  that  your 
        compiler uses an integer value other than 16 bits.   If that 
        is  the  case,  the  same  principles will be  true  but  at 
        different limits than those given above.

             Compile and run this program,  entering several numbers 
        on  a line to see the results,  and with varying numbers  of 
        blanks between the numbers.   Try entering numbers that  are 
        too big to see what happens,  and finally enter some invalid 
        characters  to  see  what the system  does  with  nondecimal 
        characters.

                           CHARACTER STRING INPUT

             Load  and  display  the file named  STRINGIN.C  for  an 
        example  of  reading  a string variable.   This  program  is 
        identical to the last one except that instead of an  integer 
        variable,  we  have defined a string variable with an  upper 
        limit of 24 characters (remember that a string variable must 
        have  a  null character at the end).   The variable  in  the 
        "scanf"  does  not  need  an & because  "big"  is  an  array 
        variable  and by definition it is already a  pointer.   This 
        program  should require no additional explanation.   Compile 
        and run it to see if it works the way you expect.

             You probably got a surprise when you ran it because  it 
        separated  your sentence into separate words.   When used in 
        the string mode of input,  "scanf" reads characters into the 
        string until it comes to either the end of a line or a blank 


                                  Page 61









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        character.   Therefore,  it  reads a word,  finds the  blank 
        following it,  and displays the result.   Since we are in  a 
        loop, this program continues to read words until it exhausts 
        the DOS input buffer.   We have written this program to stop 
        whenever  it  finds a capital X in column 1,  but since  the 
        sentence  is split up into individual words,  it  will  stop 
        anytime a word begins with capital X.  Try entering a 5 word 
        sentence  with  a  capital X as the first character  in  the 
        third word.  You should get the first three words displayed, 
        and the last two simply ignored when the program stops.

             Try  entering more than 24 characters to see  what  the 
        program does.  It should generate an error, but that will be 
        highly dependent on the system you are using.   In an actual 
        program,  it  is your responsibility to count characters and 
        stop when the input buffer is full.   You may be getting the 
        feeling  that a lot of responsibility is placed on you  when 
        writing in C.   It is, but you also get a lot of flexibility 
        in the bargain too.

                       INPUT/OUTPUT PROGRAMMING IN C

             C was not designed to be used as a language for lots of 
        input and output,  but as a systems language where a lot  of 
        internal operations are required.   You would do well to use 
        another language for I/O intensive programming,  but C could 
        be used if you desire.  The keyboard input is very flexible, 
        allowing you to get at the data in a very low level way, but 
        very little help is given you.  It is therefore up to you to 
        take  care of all of the bookkeeping chores associated  with 
        your  required  I/O operations.   This may seem like a  real 
        pain in the neck, but in any given program, you only need to 
        define your input routines once and then use them as needed.

             Don't let this worry you.   As you gain experience with 
        C, you will easily handle your I/O requirements.

             One final point must be made about these I/O functions.  
        It   is  perfectly  permissible  to  intermix  "scanf"   and 
        "getchar"  functions during read operations.   In  the  same 
        manner,  it  is also fine to intermix the output  functions, 
        "printf" and "putchar". 

                               IN MEMORY I/O

             The  next operation may seem a little strange at first, 
        but  you will probably see lots of uses for it as  you  gain 
        experience.   Load the file named INMEM.C and display it for 
        another  type  of I/O,  one that never accesses the  outside 
        world, but stays in the computer.



                                  Page 62









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


             In INMEM.C, we define a few variables, then assign some 
        values to the ones named "numbers" for illustrative purposes 
        and then use a "sprintf" function.   The function acts  just 
        like  a  normal  "printf" function except  that  instead  of 
        printing the line of output to a device,  it prints the line 
        of  formatted  output to a character string in  memory.   In 
        this  case  the string goes to the string  variable  "line", 
        because  that  is the string name we inserted as  the  first 
        argument  in the "sprintf" function.   The spaces after  the 
        2nd  %d were put there to illustrate that the next  function 
        will  search  properly  across  the  line.    We  print  the 
        resulting  string and find that the output is  identical  to 
        what  it would have been by using a "printf" instead of  the 
        "sprintf"  in the first place.   You will see that when  you 
        compile and run the program shortly.

             Since  the generated string is still in memory,  we can 
        now  read  it  with the  function  "sscanf".   We  tell  the 
        function  in its first argument that "line" is the string to 
        use for its input,  and the remaining parts of the line  are 
        exactly  what  we  would  use if we were going  to  use  the 
        "scanf"  function and read data from outside  the  computer.  
        Note  that it is essential that we use pointers to the  data 
        because  we  want to return data from a function.   Just  to 
        illustrate  that  there are many ways to declare  a  pointer 
        several methods are used,  but all are pointers.   The first 
        two simply declare the address of the elements of the array, 
        while the last three use the fact that "result", without the 
        accompanying  subscript,  is  a pointer.   Just to  keep  it 
        interesting,  the  values  are read back in  reverse  order.  
        Finally the values are displayed on the monitor. 

                           IS THAT REALLY USEFUL?

             It  seems sort of silly to read input data from  within 
        the  computer  but  it does have  a  real  purpose.   It  is 
        possible to read data in using any of the standard functions 
        and  then do a format conversion in memory.   You could read 
        in  a line of data,  look at a few  significant  characters, 
        then  use these formatted input routines to reduce the  line 
        of  data to internal representation.   That would sure  beat 
        writing your own data formatting routines.

                           STANDARD ERROR OUTPUT

             Sometimes  it is desirable to redirect the output  from 
        the  standard  output device to a file.   However,  you  may 
        still  want the error messages to go to the standard  output 
        device,  in our case the monitor.  This next function allows 
        you to do that. Load and display SPECIAL.C for an example of 
        this new function.


                                  Page 63









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output



             The  program  consists  of a  loop  with  two  messages 
        output,  one  to the standard output device and the other to 
        the  standard  error device.   The message to  the  standard 
        error  device  is  output with the  function  "fprintf"  and 
        includes  the  device name "stderr" as the  first  argument.  
        Other  than those two small changes,  it is the same as  our 
        standard  "printf"  function.   (You will see  more  of  the 
        "fprintf"  function in the next chapter,  but its  operation 
        fit  in better as a part of this chapter.)  Ignore the  line 
        with the "exit" for the moment, we will return to it.

             Compile  and  run this program,  and you will  find  12 
        lines of output on the monitor.   To see the difference, run 
        the  program  again with redirected output to a  file  named 
        "STUFF" by entering the following line at the Dos prompt;

        A> special >stuff

             More  information about I/O redirection can be found in 
        your  DOS manual.   This time you will only get the 6  lines 
        output to the standard error device, and if you look in your 
        directory,  you will find the file named "STUFF"  containing 
        the other 6 lines, those to the standard output device.  You 
        can use I/O redirection with any of the programs we have run 
        so far,  and as you may guess, you can also read from a file 
        using I/O redirection but we will study a better way to read 
        from a file in the next chapter.

                     WHAT ABOUT THE exit(4) STATEMENT?

             Now  to  keep our promise about the exit(4)  statement. 
        Redisplay  the file named SPECIAL.C on  your  monitor.   The 
        last  statement  simply  exits the program and  returns  the 
        value  of 4 to DOS.   Any number from 0 to 9 can be used  in 
        the parentheses for DOS communication.  If you are operating 
        in  a  BATCH  file,  this  number can  be  tested  with  the 
        "ERRORLEVEL" command.

             Most compilers that operate in several passes return  a 
        1  with  this mechanism to indicate that a fatal  error  has 
        occurred and it would be a waste of time to go on to another 
        pass resulting in even more errors.

             It  is therefore wise to use a batch file for compiling 
        programs and testing the returned value for errors.  A check 
        of  the documentation for my COMPAQ,  resulted in a  minimal 
        and confusing documentation of the "errorlevel" command,  so 
        a brief description of it is given in this file.




                                  Page 64









                     Chapter 9 - Standard Input/Output


        PROGRAMMING EXERCISE

        1.   Write  a program to  read in a character using a  loop, 
             and  display the character in its normal  "char"  form.      
             Also  display  it  as a decimal  number.  Check  for  a      
             dollar  sign  to use as the  stop  character.  Use  the      
             "getch" form of input so it will print immediately. Hit 
             some of the special keys,  such as function keys,  when 
             you  run the program for some surprises.  You will  get 
             two  inputs  from the special keys,  the first being  a 
             zero  which  is  the indication to the  system  that  a 
             special key was hit.









































                                  Page 65

