                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


                        WHAT IS DYNAMIC ALLOCATION?

             Dynamic allocation is very intimidating to a person the 
        first time he comes across it, but that need not be.  Simply 
        relax  and  read this chapter carefully and you will have  a 
        good grounding in a very valuable programming resource.  All 
        of the variables in every program up to this point have been 
        static  variables as far as we  are  concerned.   (Actually, 
        some  of  them  have been "automatic" and  were  dynamically 
        allocated for you by the system,  but it was transparent  to 
        you.)   In  this  chapter,  we will study  some  dynamically 
        allocated variables.   They are simply variables that do not 
        exist   when  the  program  is  loaded,   but  are   created 
        dynamically as they are needed.  It is possible, using these 
        techniques, to create as many variables as needed, use them, 
        and deallocate their space for use by other  variables.   As 
        usual,  the best teacher is an example,  so load and display 
        the program named DYNLIST.C.

             We  begin by defining a named structure "animal" with a 
        few  fields  pertaining  to dogs.   We  do  not  define  any 
        variables of this type,  only three pointers.  If you search 
        through  the  remainder  of the program,  you will  find  no 
        variables defined so we have nothing to store data in.   All 
        we have to work with are three pointers, each of which point 
        to the defined structure.   In order to do anything, we need 
        some variables, so we will create some dynamically.

                         DYNAMIC VARIABLE CREATION

             The first program statement, which assigns something to 
        the   pointer  "pet1"  will  create  a   dynamic   structure 
        containing  three variables.   The heart of the statement is 
        the "malloc" function buried in the middle of the statement.  
        This  is a "memory allocate" function that needs  the  other 
        things to completely define it.   The "malloc" function,  by 
        default, will allocate a piece of memory on a "heap" that is 
        "n" characters in length and will be of type character.  The 
        "n"  must be specified as the only argument to the function.  
        We will discuss "n" shortly,  but first we need to define  a 
        "heap".

                              WHAT IS A HEAP?

             Every compiler has a set of limitations on it as to how 
        big  the executable file can be,  how many variables can  be 
        used,  how long the source file can be, etc.  One limitation 
        placed  on  users  by  many compilers  for  the  IBM-PC  and 
        compatibles is a limit of 64K for the executable code.  This 
        is  because  the  IBM-PC uses a microprocessor  with  a  64K 
        segment  size,  and  it requires special calls to  use  data 


                                  Page 83









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


        outside  of a single segment.   In order to keep the program 
        small  and  efficient,  these calls are not  used,  and  the 
        program is limited but still adequate for most programs. 

             A  heap is an area outside of this 64K  boundary  which 
        can  be accessed by the program to store data and variables.  
        The  data and variables are put on the "heap" by the  system 
        as  calls to "malloc" are made.   The system keeps track  of 
        where  the  data  is stored.   Data  and  variables  can  be 
        deallocated  as desired leading to holes in the  heap.   The 
        system  knows  where  the holes are and will  use  them  for 
        additional  data  storage as more "malloc" calls  are  made.  
        The  structure  of  the  heap is therefore  a  very  dynamic 
        entity, changing constantly.

                            MORE ABOUT SEGMENTS

             Some  of the more expensive compilers give the  user  a 
        choice  of memory models to use.   Examples are Lattice  and 
        Microsoft,  which  allow the programmer a choice of using  a 
        model  with  a  64K  limitation on  program  size  but  more 
        efficient  running,  or using a model with a 640K limitation 
        and requiring longer address calls leading to less efficient 
        addressing.   Using the larger address space requires  inter 
        segment  addressing resulting in the slightly slower running 
        time.   The time is probably insignificant in most programs, 
        but there are other considerations.

             If  a program uses no more than 64K bytes for the total 
        of its code and memory and if it doesn't use a stack, it can 
        be made into a .COM file.  Since a .COM file is already in a 
        memory image format, it can be loaded very quickly whereas a 
        file  in a .EXE format must have its addresses relocated  as 
        it is loaded.  Therefore a small memory model can generate a 
        program  that loads faster than one generated with a  larger 
        memory model.   Don't let this worry you, it is a fine point 
        that few programmers worry about.

             Using dynamic allocation,  it is possible to store  the 
        data  on  the "heap" and that may be enough to allow you  to 
        use the small memory model.   Of course,  you wouldn't store 
        local  variables such as counters and indexes on  the  heap, 
        only very large arrays or structures. 

             Even  more  important than the need to stay within  the 
        small memory model is the need to stay within the  computer.  
        If  you  had a program that used several large data  storage 
        areas,  but not at the same time,  you could load one  block 
        storing  it  dynamically,  then get rid of it and reuse  the 
        space for the next large block of data.  Dynamically storing 
        each block of data in succession, and using the same storage 


                                  Page 84









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


        for  each block may allow you to run your entire program  in 
        the computer without breaking it up into smaller programs. 

                       BACK TO THE "MALLOC" FUNCTION

             Hopefully  the above description of the "heap" and  the 
        overall plan for dynamic allocation helped you to understand 
        what  we are doing with the "malloc"  function.   It  simply 
        asks the system for a block of memory of the size specified, 
        and  gets  the block with the pointer pointing to the  first 
        element of the block.   The only argument in the parentheses 
        is the size of the block desired and in our present case, we 
        desire  a  block  that will hold one of  the  structures  we 
        defined at the beginning of the program.   The "sizeof" is a 
        new function,  new to us at least,  that returns the size in 
        bytes of the argument within its parentheses.  It therefore, 
        returns  the size of the structure named animal,  in  bytes, 
        and  that  number is sent to the system  with  the  "malloc" 
        call.   At  the completion of that call,  we have a block on 
        the  heap allocated to us,  with pet1 pointing to the  first 
        byte of the block.     

                              WHAT IS A CAST?

             We  still  have  a  funny  looking  construct  at   the 
        beginning  of the "malloc" function call.   That is called a 
        "cast".   The  "malloc"  function returns a block  with  the 
        pointer  pointing  to it being a pointer of type  "char"  by 
        default.  Many times, if not most, you do not want a pointer 
        to a "char" type variable,  but to some other type.  You can 
        define  the  pointer type with the construct  given  on  the 
        example line.   In this case we want the pointer to point to 
        a  structure of type "animal",  so we tell the compiler with 
        this strange looking construct.   Even if you omit the cast, 
        most compilers will return a pointer correctly,  give you  a 
        warning,  and  go  on to produce a working program.   It  is 
        better programming practice to provide the compiler with the 
        cast to prevent getting the warning message.

                USING THE DYNAMICALLY ALLOCATED MEMORY BLOCK

             If you remember our studies of structures and pointers, 
        you  will recall that if we have a structure with a  pointer 
        pointing  to it,  we can access any of the variables  within 
        the structure.   In the next three lines of the program,  we 
        assign  some silly data to the structure  for  illustration.  
        It  should come as no surprise to you that these  assignment 
        statements  look just like assignments to statically defined 
        variables.




                                  Page 85









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


             In the next statement, we assign the value of "pet1" to 
        "pet2" also.   This creates no new data,  we simply have two 
        pointers  to the same object.   Since "pet2" is pointing  to 
        the structure we created above,  "pet1" can be reused to get 
        another  dynamically allocated structure which is just  what 
        we  do next.   Keep in mind that "pet2" could have  just  as 
        easily been used for the new allocation.   The new structure 
        is filled with silly data for illustration.

             Finally,  we  allocate another block on the heap  using 
        the  pointer  "pet3",  and fill its block with  illustrative 
        data.

             Printing  the  data out should pose no problem  to  you 
        since  there is nothing new in the three  print  statements.  
        It is left for you to study.

               GETTING RID OF THE DYNAMICALLY ALLOCATED DATA

             Another new function is used to get rid of the data and 
        free  up  the  space on the heap  for  reuse,  the  function 
        "free".   To use it,  you simply call it with the pointer to 
        the   block  as  the  only  argument,   and  the  block   is 
        deallocated.

             In  order  to illustrate another aspect of the  dynamic 
        allocation and deallocation of data,  an additional step  is 
        included in the program on your monitor.  The pointer "pet1" 
        is assigned the value of "pet3".   In doing this,  the block 
        that  "pet1" was pointing to is effectively lost since there 
        is  no pointer that is now pointing to that block.   It  can 
        therefore never again be referred to,  changed,  or disposed 
        of.   That memory,  which is a block on the heap,  is wasted 
        from  this point on.   This is not something that you  would 
        ever  purposely do in a program.   It is only done here  for 
        illustration.

             The  first  "free" function call removes the  block  of 
        data that "pet1" and "pet3" were pointing to, and the second 
        "free"  call  removes  the block of  data  that  "pet2"  was 
        pointing  to.   We therefore have lost access to all of  our 
        data  generated earlier.   There is still one block of  data 
        that  is on the heap but there is no pointer to it since  we 
        lost  the address to it.   Trying to "free" the data pointed 
        to by "pet1" would result in an error because it has already 
        been  "freed"  by the use of "pet3".   There is no  need  to 
        worry,  when  we  return to DOS,  the entire  heap  will  be 
        disposed  of with no regard to what we have put on it.   The 
        point  does need to made that losing a pointer to a block of 
        the  heap,  forever removes that block of data storage  from 
        our program and we may need that storage later.


                                  Page 86









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation



             Compile and run the program to see if it does what  you 
        think it should do based on this discussion.

                        THAT WAS A LOT OF DISCUSSION

             It took nearly four pages to get through the discussion 
        of  the last program but it was time well spent.   It should 
        be  somewhat exciting to you to know that there  is  nothing 
        else to learn about dynamic allocation,  the last four pages 
        covered  it all.   Of course,  there is a lot to learn about 
        the  technique  of using dynamic allocation,  and  for  that 
        reason,  there  are two more files to study.   But the  fact 
        remains,  there  is  nothing  more to  learn  about  dynamic 
        allocation than what was given so far in this chapter.

                            AN ARRAY OF POINTERS

             Load and display the file BIGDYNL.C for another example 
        of dynamic allocation.   This program is very similar to the 
        last one since we use the same structure,  but this time  we 
        define an array of pointers to illustrate the means by which 
        you  could build a large database using an array of pointers 
        rather  than a single pointer to each element.   To keep  it 
        simple  we  define  12 elements in  the  array  and  another 
        working pointer named "point".

             The "*pet[12]" is new to you so a few words would be in 
        order.  What we have defined is an array of 12 pointers, the 
        first  being "pet[0]",  and the last  "pet[11]".   Actually, 
        since an array is itself a pointer, the name "pet" by itself 
        is a pointer to a pointer.   This is valid in C, and in fact 
        you  can  go  farther  if needed but you  will  get  quickly 
        confused.   I  know  of no limit as to how  many  levels  of 
        pointing are possible,  so a definition such as "int ****pt" 
        is legal as a pointer to a pointer to a pointer to a pointer 
        to an integer type variable, if I counted right.  Such usage 
        is discouraged until you gain considerable experience.

             Now that we have 12 pointers which can be used like any 
        other  pointer,  it  is a simple matter to write a  loop  to 
        allocate  a data block dynamically for each and to fill  the 
        respective  fields with any data desirable.   In this  case, 
        the  fields  are  filled with simple data  for  illustrative 
        purposes,  but we could be reading in a  database,  readings 
        from some tesequipment, or   any other source of data.

             A  few fields are randomly picked to receive other data 
        to illustrate that simple assignments can be used,  and  the 
        data is printed out to the monitor.   The pointer "point" is 
        used  in the printout loop only to serve as an illustration, 


                                  Page 87









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


        the  data could have been easily printed using the  "pet[n]" 
        means  of definition.   Finally,  all 12 blocks of data  are 
        freed before terminating the program.

             Compile  and run this program to aid  in  understanding 
        this  technique.   As stated earlier,  there was nothing new 
        here  about  dynamic  allocation,  only about  an  array  of 
        pointers.

                               A LINKED LIST

             We  finally  come to the grandaddy of  all  programming 
        techniques as far as being intimidating.   Load the  program 
        DYNLINK.C  for an example of a dynamically allocated  linked 
        list.   It  sounds terrible,  but after a little time  spent 
        with it,  you will see that it is simply another programming 
        technique  made  up  of  simple components  that  can  be  a 
        powerful tool.

             In order to set your mind at ease,  consider the linked 
        list  you used when you were a child.   Your sister gave you 
        your birthday present,  and when you opened it,  you found a 
        note that said,  "Look in the hall closet."  You went to the 
        hall closet,  and found another note that said, "Look behind 
        the  TV  set."  Behind the TV you found  another  note  that 
        said,  "Look  under  the  coffee pot."  You  continued  this 
        search,  and finally you found your pair of socks under  the 
        dogs  feeding dish.   What you actually did was to execute a 
        linked  list,  the starting point being the wrapped  present 
        and the ending point being under the dogs feeding dish.  The 
        list ended at the dogs feeding dish since there were no more 
        notes.

             In  the program DYNLINK.C,  we will be doing  the  same 
        thing as your sister forced you to do.   We will however, do 
        it  much  faster and we will leave a little pile of data  at 
        each of the intermediate points along the way.  We will also 
        have   the  capability  to  return  to  the  beginning   and 
        retraverse the entire list again and again if we so desire.

                            THE DATA DEFINITIONS

             This program starts similarly to the last two with  the 
        addition  of the definition of a constant to be used  later.  
        The  structure  is nearly the same as that used in the  last 
        two programs except for the addition of another field within 
        the structure,  the pointer.   This pointer is a pointer  to 
        another  structure  of  this same type and will be  used  to 
        point to the next structure in order.  To continue the above 
        analogy,  this pointer will point to the next note, which in 
        turn will contain a pointer to the next note after that.


                                  Page 88









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation



             We  define three pointers to this structure for use  in 
        the program, and one integer to be used as a counter, and we 
        are ready to begin using the defined structure for  whatever 
        purpose  we  desire.   In  this case,  we  will  once  again 
        generate nonsense data for illustrative purposes.

                              THE FIRST FIELD

             Using  the  "malloc" function,  we request a  block  of 
        storage on the "heap" and fill it with data.  The additional  
        field in this example, the pointer, is assigned the value of 
        NULL, which is only used to indicate that this is the end of 
        the  list.   We  will  leave  the pointer  "start"  at  this 
        structure,  so  that  it  will always  point  to  the  first 
        structure of the list.   We also assign "prior" the value of 
        "start" for reasons we will see soon.  Keep in mind that the 
        end  points of a linked list will always have to be  handled 
        differently  than those in the middle of a list.   We have a 
        single  element  of  our  list now and  it  is  filled  with 
        representative data.

                       FILLING ADDITIONAL STRUCTURES

             The  next group of assignments and  control  statements 
        are  included  within a "for" loop so we can build our  list 
        fast  once  it is defined.   We will go through the  loop  a 
        number  of times equal to the constant "RECORDS" defined  at 
        the  beginning  of  our  program.   Each  time  through,  we 
        allocate memory,  fill the first three fields with nonsense, 
        and  fill the pointers.   The pointer in the last record  is 
        given  the  address of this new record because  the  "prior" 
        pointer is pointing to the prior record.  Thus "prior->next" 
        is given the address of the new record we have just  filled.  
        The  pointer in the new record is assigned the value "NULL", 
        and  the  pointer "prior" is given the address of  this  new 
        record  because the next time we create a record,  this  one 
        will  be  the  prior  one at  that  time.   That  may  sound 
        confusing  but it really does make sense if you  spend  some 
        time studying it.

             When  we have gone through the "for" loop 6  times,  we 
        will  have  a  list  of 7 structures including  the  one  we 
        generated  prior  to  the loop.   The  list  will  have  the 
        following characteristics.


        1. "start" points to the first structure in the list.

        2. Each structure contains a pointer to the next structure.



                                  Page 89









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


        3. The last structure has a pointer  that points to NULL and    
           can be used to detect the end.

           start->struct1              This diagram should aid in
                  name              understanding the structure of
                  breed             the data at this point.
                  age
                  point->struct2
                         name
                         breed
                         age
                         point->struct3
                                name
                                breed
                                age
                                point-> . . . . struct7
                                                name
                                                breed
                                                age
                                                point->NULL


             It should be clear to you,  if you understand the above 
        structure,  that  it is not possible to simply jump into the 
        middle of the structure and change a few values.   The  only 
        way  to  get  to the third structure is by starting  at  the 
        beginning  and working your way down through  the  structure 
        one  record at a time.   Although this may seem like a large 
        price  to  pay for the convenience of putting so  much  data 
        outside of the program area,  it is actually a very good way 
        to store some kinds of data.

            A  word processor would be a good application  for  this 
        type  of data structure because you would never need to have 
        random access to the data.   In actual practice, this is the 
        basic type of storage used for the text in a word  processor 
        with one line of text per record.   Actually, a program with 
        any degree of sophistication would use a doubly linked list.  
        This  would  be  a list with two pointers  per  record,  one 
        pointing down to the next record,  and the other pointing up 
        to the record just prior to the one in question.  Using this 
        kind  of a record structure would allow traversing the  data 
        in either direction.

                           PRINTING THE DATA OUT

             To print the data out, a similar method is used as that 
        used to generate the data.  The pointers are initialized and 
        are  then  used  to go from record  to  record  reading  and 
        displaying   each  record  one  at  a  time.    Printing  is 
        terminated when the NULL on the last record is found, so the 


                                  Page 90









                      Chapter 12 - Dynamic Allocation


        program  doesn't even need to know how many records  are  in 
        the list.   Finally, the entire list is deleted to make room 
        in  memory  for any additional data that may be  needed,  in 
        this case, none.  Care must be taken to assure that the last 
        record is not deleted before the NULL is checked.   Once the 
        data is gone,  it is impossible to know if you are  finished 
        yet.

               MORE ABOUT DYNAMIC ALLOCATION AND LINKED LISTS

             It  is  not difficult,  and it is not trivial,  to  add 
        elements into the middle of a linked lists.  It is necessary 
        to create the new record,  fill it with data,  and point its 
        pointer to the record it is desired to precede.   If the new 
        record  is  to be installed between the  3rd  and  4th,  for 
        example,  it is necessary for the new record to point to the 
        4th record,  and the pointer in the 3rd record must point to 
        the new one.  Adding a new record to the beginning or end of 
        a  list are each special cases.   Consider what must be done 
        to add a new record in a doubly linked list. 

             Entire books are written describing different types  of 
        linked lists and how to use them,  so no further detail will 
        be  given.   The amount of detail given should be sufficient 
        for a beginning understanding of C and its capabilities.

                       ANOTHER NEW FUNCTION - CALLOC

             One  more  function must  be  mentioned,  the  "calloc" 
        function.   This  function  allocates a block of memory  and 
        clears  it  to  all  zeros  which  may  be  useful  in  some 
        circumstances.   It is similar to "malloc" and will be  left 
        as an exercise for you to read about and use "calloc" if you 
        desire.

        PROGRAMMING EXERCISES

        1.  Rewrite the example program STRUCT1.C from chapter 11 to 
            dynamically allocate the two structures.

        2.  Rewrite the example program STRUCT2.C from chapter 11 to 
            dynamically allocate the 12 structures.











                                  Page 91

