                 Chapter 13 - Character and Bit Manipulation


                            UPPER AND LOWER CASE

             Load  and display the program UPLOW.C for an example of 
        a  program that does lots of character  manipulation.   More 
        specifically,  it changes the case of alphabetic  characters 
        around.   It illustrates the use of four functions that have 
        to  do with case.   It should be no problem for you to study 
        this program on your own and understand how it  works.   The 
        four functions on display in this program are all within the 
        user written function,  "mix_up_the_line".   Compile and run 
        the  program  with  the  file  of  your  choice.   The  four 
        functions are;

             isupper();     Is the character upper case?
             islower();     Is the character lower case?
             toupper();     Make the character upper case.
             tolower();     Make the character lower case.

                        CLASSIFICATION OF CHARACTERS

             Load  and display the next program,  CHARCLAS.C for  an 
        example of character counting.   We have repeatedly used the 
        backslash  n character representing a new line.   There  are 
        several  others that are commonly used,  so they are defined 
        in the following table;

             \n             Newline
             \t             Tab
             \b             Backspace
             \"             Double quote
             \\             Backslash
             \0             NULL (zero)

             By  preceding  each of the above  characters  with  the 
        backslash character, the character can be included in a line 
        of text for display,  or printing.   In the same way that it 
        is  perfectly  all right to use the letter "n" in a line  of 
        text as a part of someone's name, and as an end-of-line, the 
        other  characters can be used as parts of text or for  their 
        particular functions. 

             The program on your screen uses the functions that  can 
        determine   the  class  of  a  character,   and  counts  the 
        characters  in  each class.   The number of  each  class  is 
        displayed  along with the line itself.   The three functions 
        are as follows;

             isalpha();     Is the character alphabetic?
             isdigit();     Is the character a numeral?
             isspace();     Is the character any of, \n, \t, 
                              or blank?


                                   Page 92









                 Chapter 13 - Character and Bit Manipulation



             This program should be simple for you to find your  way 
        through  so no explanation will be given.   It was necessary 
        to give an example with these functions used.   Compile  and 
        run this program with any file you choose.

                           THE LOGICAL FUNCTIONS

             Load and display the program BITOPS.C. The functions in 
        this  group of functions are used to do bitwise  operations, 
        meaning  that  the operations are performed on the  bits  as 
        though they were individual bits.   No carry from bit to bit 
        is performed as would be done with a binary addition.   Even 
        though  the operations are performed on a single bit  basis, 
        an entire byte or integer variable can be operated on in one 
        instruction.   The operators and the operations they perform 
        are given in the following table;

             &    Logical AND, if both bits are 1, the result is 1.
             |    Logical OR, if either bit is one, the result is 1.
             ^    Logical XOR,  (exclusive OR),  if one and only one 
                    bit is 1, the result is 1.
             ~    Logical invert,  if the bit is 1, the result is 0, 
                    and if the bit is 0, the result is 1.

             The  example  program  uses  several  fields  that  are 
        combined  in each of the ways given above.   The data is  in 
        hexadecimal  format.   It  will be assumed that you  already 
        know hexadecimal format if you need to use these operations.  
        If  you  don't,  you  will need to study  it  on  your  own.  
        Teaching  the  hexadecimal format of numbers is  beyond  the 
        scope of this tutorial.

             Run the program and observe the output.

                           THE SHIFT INSTRUCTIONS

             The  last two operations to be covered in this  chapter 
        are  the left shift and the right shift instructions.   Load 
        the example program SHIFTER.C for an example using these two 
        instructions.    The   two  operations  use  the   following 
        operators;

             << n      Left shift n places.
             >> n      Right shift n places.

             Once again the operations are carried out and displayed 
        using the hexadecimal format.   The program should be simple 
        for you to understand on your own, there is no tricky code.




                                   Page 93

