                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


                             WHAT IS A POINTER?

             Simply  stated,  a pointer is an address.   Instead  of 
        being  a  variable,  it  is a pointer to a  variable  stored 
        somewhere in the address space of the program.  It is always 
        best to use an example so load the file named POINTER.C  and 
        display  it on your monitor for an example of a program with 
        some pointers in it.

             For  the moment,  ignore the data declaration statement 
        where we define "index" and two other fields beginning  with 
        a star.   It is properly called an asterisk, but for reasons 
        we  will see later,  let's agree to call it a star.   If you 
        observe  the  first statement,  it should be clear  that  we 
        assign the value of 39 to the variable "index".   This is no 
        surprise,  we  have been doing it for several programs  now.  
        The  next  statement  however,  says to assign  to  "pt1"  a 
        strange looking value,  namely the variable "index" with  an 
        ampersand in front of it.   In this example, pt1 and pt2 are 
        pointers,  and  the  variable "index" is a simple  variable.  
        Now we have a problem.  We need to learn how to use pointers 
        in a program, but to do so requires that first we define the 
        means of using the pointers in the program.

             The  following two rules will be somewhat confusing  to 
        you at first but we need to state the definitions before  we 
        can  use  them.   Take your time,  and the whole thing  will 
        clear up very quickly.

                          TWO VERY IMPORTANT RULES

             The  following two rules are very important when  using 
        pointers and must be thoroughly understood.

        1.  A variable name with an ampersand in front of it defines 
            the  address of the variable and therefore points to the 
            variable.   You  can therefore read line six as  "pt1 is 
            assigned the value of the address of index". 
           
        2.  A  pointer  with a "star" in front of it refers  to  the 
            value of the variable pointed to by the  pointer.   Line 
            nine of the program can be read as "The stored (starred) 
            value  to which the pointer "pt1" points is assigned the 
            value  13".   Now  you can see why it is  convenient  to 
            think of the asterisk as a star,  it sort of sounds like 
            the word store.

                                  MEMORY AIDS

            1. Think of & as an address.
            2. Think of * as a star referring to stored.


                                  Page 48









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers



             Assume for the moment that "pt1" and "pt2" are pointers 
        (we will see how to define them shortly).  As pointers, they 
        do not contain a variable value but an address of a variable 
        and  can be used to point to a variable.   Line six  of  the 
        program  assigns the pointer "pt1" to point to the  variable 
        we have already defined as "index" because we have  assigned 
        the address of "index" to "pt1".  Since we have a pointer to 
        "index",  we  can  manipulate the value of "index" by  using 
        either the variable name itself, or the pointer.

             Line  nine  modifies the value by  using  the  pointer. 
        Since the pointer "pt1" points to the variable "index", then 
        putting  a  star in front of the pointer name refers to  the 
        memory  location  to  which  it  is  pointing.    Line  nine 
        therefore  assigns to "index" the value of 13.  Anyplace  in 
        the program where it is permissible to use the variable name 
        "index", it is also permissible to use the name "*pt1" since 
        they   are  identical  in  meaning  until  the  pointer   is 
        reassigned to some other variable.

                              ANOTHER POINTER

             Just  to add a little intrigue to the system,  we  have 
        another  pointer defined in  this  program,  "pt2".    Since 
        "pt2"  has  not  been assigned a value  prior  to  statement 
        seven,  it  doesn't point to anything,  it contains garbage.  
        Of course,  that is also true of any variable until a  value 
        is  assigned to it.  Statement seven assigns "pt2" the  same 
        address  as  "pt1",  so  that now "pt2" also points  to  the 
        variable  "index".   So to continue the definition from  the 
        last  paragraph,   anyplace  in  the  program  where  it  is 
        permissible  to  use  the  variable  "index",   it  is  also 
        permissible  to  use  the  name  "*pt2"  because  they   are 
        identical in meaning.  This fact is illustrated in the first 
        "printf" statement since this statement uses the three means 
        of  identifying  the  same variable to print  out  the  same 
        variable three times.

                         THERE IS ONLY ONE VARIABLE

             Note carefully that,  even though it appears that there 
        are three variables, there is really only one variable.  The 
        two  pointers  point  to  the  single  variable.    This  is 
        illustrated in the next statement which assigns the value of 
        13  to  the  variable "index",  because that  is  where  the 
        pointer  "pt1"  is pointing.   The next  "printf"  statement 
        causes  the  new value of 13 to be printed out three  times.  
        Keep  in mind that there is really only one variable  to  be 
        changed, not three.



                                  Page 49









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


             This is admittedly a very difficult concept,  but since 
        it  is  used  extensively  in all but  the  most  trivial  C 
        programs,  it  is  well  worth your time to stay  with  this 
        material until you understand it thoroughly.

                        HOW DO YOU DECLARE A POINTER?

             Now  to  keep a promise and tell you how to  declare  a 
        pointer.   Refer  to the third line of the program  and  you 
        will  see  our  old familiar way of  defining  the  variable 
        "index",  followed  by  two more  definitions.   The  second 
        definition  can  be read as "the storage location  to  which 
        "pt1"  points  will be an int  type  variable".   Therefore, 
        "pt1" is a pointer to an int type variable.  Likewise, "pt2" 
        is another pointer to an int type variable. 

             A  pointer  must  be defined to point to some  type  of 
        variable.   Following a proper definition, it cannot be used 
        to point to any other type of variable or it will result  in 
        a  "type incompatibility" error.   In the same manner that a 
        "float"  type of variable cannot be added to an  "int"  type 
        variable,  a pointer to a "float" variable cannot be used to 
        point to an integer variable. 

             Compile and run this program and observe that there  is 
        only one variable and the single statement in line 9 changes 
        the one variable which is displayed three times.

                      THE SECOND PROGRAM WITH POINTERS

             In these few pages so far on pointers,  we have covered 
        a lot of territory, but it is important territory.  We still 
        have  a  lot  of  material to cover so stay in  tune  as  we 
        continue  this important aspect of C.   Load the  next  file 
        named  POINTER2.C  and display it on your monitor so we  can 
        continue our study.

             In  this program we have defined several variables  and 
        two pointers.   The first pointer named "there" is a pointer 
        to  a "char" type variable and the second named "pt"  points 
        to an "int" type variable.  Notice also that we have defined 
        two  array variables named "strg" and "list".   We will  use 
        them  to show the correspondence between pointers and  array 
        names.

                  A STRING VARIABLE IS ACTUALLY A POINTER

             In  the programming language C,  a string  variable  is 
        defined to be simply a pointer to the beginning of a string.  
        This  will  take  some explaining.   Refer  to  the  example 
        program  on  your monitor.   You will notice that  first  we 


                                  Page 50









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


        assign a string constant to the string variable named "strg" 
        so we will have some data to work with.  Next, we assign the 
        value  of the first element to the variable "one",  a simple 
        "char" variable.   Next,  since the string name is a pointer 
        by  definition  of the C language,  we can assign  the  same 
        value to "two" by using the star and the string  name.   The 
        result  of  the two assignments are such that "one" now  has 
        the same value as "two", and both contain the character "T", 
        the  first character in the string.   Note that it would  be 
        incorrect  to  write  the ninth line as  "two  =  *strg[0];" 
        because the star takes the place of the square brackets.

             For all practical purposes,  "strg" is a  pointer.   It 
        does, however, have one restriction that a true pointer does 
        not  have.   It cannot be changed like a variable,  but must 
        always contain the initial value and therefore always points 
        to  its  string.   It  could  be thought  of  as  a  pointer 
        constant,  and in some applications you may desire a pointer 
        that cannot be corrupted in any way.   Even though it cannot 
        be changed, it can be used to refer to other values than the 
        one  it is defined to point to,  as we will see in the  next 
        section of the program.

             Moving ahead to line 12, the variable "one" is assigned 
        the  value of the ninth variable (since the indexing  starts 
        at zero) and "two" is assigned the same value because we are 
        allowed to index a pointer to get to values farther ahead in 
        the string.  Both variables now contain the character "a".

            The C programming language takes care of indexing for us 
        automatically  by  adjusting the indexing for  the  type  of 
        variable  the  pointer is pointing to.   In this  case,  the 
        index  of  8  is simply added to the  pointer  value  before 
        looking up the desired result because a "char" type variable 
        is  one byte long.   If we were using a pointer to an  "int" 
        type variable,  the index would be doubled and added to  the 
        pointer  before  looking up the value because an "int"  type 
        variable  uses two bytes per value stored.   When we get  to 
        the chapter on structures,  we will see that a variable  can 
        have  many,   even  into  the  hundreds  or  thousands,   of 
        characters  per variable,  but the indexing will be  handled 
        automatically for us by the system.

             Since "there" is already a pointer,  it can be assigned 
        the value of the eleventh element of "strg" by the statement 
        in line 16 of the program.  Remember that since "there" is a 
        true  pointer,  it can be assigned any value as long as that 
        value  represents a "char" type of address.   It  should  be 
        clear  that  the pointers must be "typed" in order to  allow 
        the pointer arithmetic described in the last paragraph to be 



                                  Page 51









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


        done  properly.   The third and fourth outputs will  be  the 
        same, namely the letter "c".

                             POINTER ARITHMETIC

             Not  all  forms  of  arithmetic are  permissible  on  a 
        pointer.   Only  those things that make  sense,  considering 
        that a pointer is an address somewhere in the computer.   It 
        would  make sense to add a constant to an  address,  thereby 
        moving it ahead in memory that number of places.   Likewise, 
        subtraction  is permissible,  moving it back some number  of 
        locations.   Adding  two  pointers together would  not  make 
        sense  because absolute memory addresses are  not  additive.  
        Pointer multiplication is also not allowed, as that would be 
        a  funny number.   If you think about what you are  actually 
        doing,  it will make sense to you what is allowed,  and what 
        is not.    

                         NOW FOR AN INTEGER POINTER

             The  array named "list" is assigned a series of  values 
        from  100  to 199 in order to have some data to  work  with.  
        Next  we  assign  the  pointer "pt" the value  of  the  28th 
        element  of the list and print out the same value both  ways 
        to  illustrate that the system truly will adjust  the  index 
        for the "int" type variable.   You should spend some time in 
        this program until you feel you fairly well understand these 
        lessons on pointers.

             Compile and run POINTER2.C and study the output.

             You  may recall that back in the lesson on functions we 
        mentioned that there were two ways to get variable data back 
        from a function.   One way is through use of the array,  and 
        you should be right on the verge of guessing the other  way.  
        If your guess is through use of a pointer,  you are correct.  
        Load  and display the program named TWOWAY.C for an  example 
        of this.

                    FUNCTION DATA RETURN WITH A POINTER
             
             In  TWOWAY.C,  there  are two variables defined in  the 
        main program "pecans" and "apples".   Notice that neither of 
        these is defined as a pointer.   We assign values to both of 
        these  and print them out,  then call the  function  "fixup" 
        taking with us both of these values.   The variable "pecans" 
        is  simply  sent  to the function,  but the address  of  the 
        variable  "apples" is sent to the function.   Now we have  a 
        problem.   The two arguments are not the same, the second is 
        a pointer to a variable.  We must somehow alert the function 
        to  the  fact  that it is supposed  to  receive  an  integer 


                                  Page 52









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


        variable  and a pointer to an integer variable.   This turns 
        out   to  be  very  simple.    Notice  that  the   parameter 
        definitions in the function define "nuts" as an integer, and 
        "fruit"  as a pointer to an integer.   The call in the  main 
        program  therefore  is now in agreement  with  the  function 
        heading and the program interface will work just fine.

             In  the body of the function,  we print the two  values 
        sent  to  the function,  then modify them and print the  new 
        values out.   This should be perfectly clear to you by  now.  
        The  surprise occurs when we return to the main program  and 
        print out the two values again.  We will find that the value 
        of  pecans will be restored to its value before the function 
        call  because  the C language makes a copy of  the  item  in 
        question and takes the copy to the called function,  leaving 
        the original intact.   In the case of the variable "apples", 
        we  made  a copy of a pointer to the variable and  took  the 
        copy of the pointer to the function.  Since we had a pointer 
        to  the  original variable,  even though the pointer  was  a 
        copy,  we  had  access  to the original variable  and  could 
        change  it in the function.   When we returned to  the  main 
        program,  we  found  a  changed value in  "apples"  when  we 
        printed it out. 

             By  using  a pointer in a function call,  we  can  have 
        access  to the data in the function and change it in such  a 
        way  that when we return to the calling program,  we have  a 
        changed  value  of data.    It must be pointed out  however, 
        that  if you modify the value of the pointer itself  in  the 
        function,  you  will have a restored pointer when you return 
        because the pointer you use in the function is a copy of the 
        original.  In this example, there was no pointer in the main 
        program because we simply sent the address to the  function, 
        but  in  many  programs you will use  pointers  in  function 
        calls.  One of the places you will find need for pointers in 
        function  calls  will be when you request data  input  using 
        standard  input/output routines.   These will be covered  in 
        the next two chapters.

             Compile and run TWOWAY.C and observe the output.

                           POINTERS ARE VALUABLE

             Even  though  you are probably somewhat intimidated  at 
        this point by the use of pointers,  you will find that after 
        you  gain experience,  you will use them profusely  in  many 
        ways.  You will also use pointers in every program you write 
        other than the most trivial because they are so useful.  You 
        should  probably  go  over this material  carefully  several 
        times until you feel comfortable with it because it is  very 



                                  Page 53









                            Chapter 8 - Pointers


        important  in the area of input/output which is next on  the 
        agenda.


        PROGRAMMING EXERCISES

        1.   Define  a character array  and use "strcpy" to  copy  a 
             string  into it.  Print the string out by using a  loop 
             with  a  pointer to print out one character at a  time. 
             Initialize the pointer to the first element and use the 
             double  plus  sign  to increment  the  pointer.  Use  a 
             separate  integer variable to count the  characters  to 
             print.

        2.   Modify the program to print out the string backwards by 
             pointing to the end and using a decrementing pointer.





































                                  Page 54

