    If you have downloaded this file from the CompuServe Information
    Service (CIS), please read on...

    First, THANK YOU for taking the time to download this file..!

    NEXT
    ----
    For your convenience, I'll be uploading a file named UNCLCARL.LZH
    It contains a "catalog" listing of most of my files. You may
    therefore wish to d/l and peruse it before deciding to d/l a
    particular file.

    WHY
    ---
    CIS fees ($22.50/hr - $10.00/hr phone bill, $12.50/hr connect fee)
    necessitate keeping the phone call as short as possible !
    
    Inordinate line noise (I generally need to u/l a file more than once)
    and sluggish CIS "response" time (if I enter  GO anything  it takes
    from 15 to 45 seconds to get a response, even after midnight on a
    Tuesday) also run up the connect fees.

    For these reasons I have needed to keep "file descriptions" to a
    minimum.

    REGISTRATIONS
    -------------
    These same limitations also make it impractical and expensive to offer
    registration through CIS. Registrations and support are therefore only
    available through regular mail.

    FIXING A HOLE
    -------------
    I contacted CIS several years ago about my difficulties (which prevail
    to this day). They state that they ARE aware of the problem, but have
    no plans on addressing it since there are not enough people in North
    Eastern PA. using CIS to be worth their time. Oh well...

    CORRESPONDENCE
    --------------
    I understand that CIS recently implemented some sort of new service/fee
    policy. Since I don't receive the CIS magazine (I never entered a
    subscription) I have no idea what this policy entails. I DO know that
    my "E.MAIL box" is no longer accessible to me (and maybe to you ?).

    Since I cannot afford to spend $22.50/hr to go searching for answers,
    it would be appreciated if all correspondence were sent by regular
    mail to the address specified in the programs documentation.

    THAT'S IT
    ---------
    Thanks Again !
