








                 ENhanCed Hisoft ApplicatioN toolkiT (ENCHANT)
                    Developed by Matthew Bacon & Paul Jones

           ENCHANT is Copyright 1997-1998 Matthew Bacon & Paul Jones
                          Revision 30th November 1998














תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת

ת Welcome

Welcome to the ENCHANT demo disk! On this disk you will find copies of the
example programs supplied with the complete ENCHANT package.

ת Minimum Requirements
  ת Atari (TOS) compatible Operating System
  ת HiSoft BASIC¿ v2.10
  ת 1Mb memory (more is strongly recommended!)

ת Copyright
  ENCHANT is Copyright 1997-1998 Matthew Bacon & Paul Jones. All rights reserved
  HiSoft BASIC is Copyright 1991-1998 HiSoft UK. All copyrights acknowledged
  All trademarks acknowledged

תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת

ת Introduction

     Welcome to the ENhanCed Hisoft ApplicatioN toolkiT (ENCHANT). With many
years of combined experience, Paul and myself have suffered (lack of sleep
mainly!) and learnt a great deal!! ENCHANT provides you with immediate
access to this experience (without the pain!).

     ENCHANT consists of a few hundred routines (over nine thousand lines
of source code), the result of many months of development by Matthew Bacon
(Cadenza Software) & Paul Jones (PJCO).
     ENCHANT includes a brand NEW GEM Toolkit (providing support for
non-modal dialogs, flydial dialogs and alerts, modern radio buttons and check
boxes, popup menus etc.). All you need to do is request the routine from
within your own source code, all the complicated stuff is done for you!!
ENCHANT is suitable for both novice and pro users.

     With the rapid development of system enhancements over recent years,
HiSoft BASIC users were previously unable to make full use of their potential.
However, ENCHANT (as you have probably guessed) brings GEM development bang
upto date including NVDI support and access to the BubbleGEM and ST-Guide
protocols to name but a few.

Best regards,

Matthew & Paul

תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת

ת Where can I purchase ENCHANT?

ENCHANT costs only 15.00 UKP (excluding P&P) and can be purchased from:

Cadenza Software: 49 Douglas Road, Surbiton Surrey, KT6 7RZ, UK

All cheques should be made payable to "Matthew Bacon". Please allow 28 days for
delivery.

Cadenza Software also have copies of HiSoft BASIC v2.10 available (ENCHANT
requires HiSoft BASIC v2.10!) at 35.00 UKP (excluding P&P). For further
details contact Cadenza Software at the address above or Email Matthew at:
cadenza@cyberstrider.org

Please note prices are subject to change without notice.

תתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתתת

[END OF FILE]
