 STIS 3-D version 2.0 ½1994 by Phillip W. O'Neal

About STIS 3-D:
      STIS was designed to change an image that you create into a 
stereoscopic 3-D image. STIS will run on any ST, TT, FALCON, ect., and 
create 3-D images any size(limited by memory) and any number of colors. 

What the menu entries do:
FILE
-------
 (O)pen - select a PNT/TPI file to convert to 3-D . During the conversion you 
can click in the image window or press the SPACEBAR to update the display.

 (C)lose - Erase STIS image from memory.

 (S)ave - Save the STIS image as a PNT/TPI file.

 (Q)uit - Exit the program.

INFO
-------
 System (?) - Display information about your system.

 (F)ile - Display information about a PNT/TPI file. 

COLOR
-----------
 (U)se - Sets the way STIS uses the color information of each pixel in the 
PNT/TPI file while converting to 3-D. The settings are only used when 
converting a palette based image. 
 Save settings will save the status of the color use buttons in STIS.INF and 
if this file exists in the programs directory it will load the settings when 
the program is run.
 While converting the file to a 3-D image each pixels color is used to set 
the depth of a pixel in the 3-D image.
 If 'VDI order' is selected then the color register number of each pixel is 
converted to the order that the VDI stores them in.
 If 'RGB value' is selected then the depth of a pixel is set using the RGB 
value of the pixel. A depth of 0 would be the background and the larger the 
pixels RGB value the farther from the background the pixel appears, otherwise 
the depth of a pixel is set using the resisters number: in a 256 color 
picture you can have 256 depths from 0 to 255.

 (R)estore - Restore the system palette as before the program was run.

PATTERN
---------------
 (L)oad - load a pattern. If the file 'PAT_???.PNT' / 'PAT_???.TPI' 
(???=2,4,16,256,16B,24B,ect. for number of colors or (B)its per pixel) exists 
in the programs directory it will automatically load when the program is run. 
The pattern can be any size but the width should be a multiple of 16. If no 
pattern file exists then a default pattern will be used.

 (V)iew - display the current pattern.

The keyboard:

 TAB - Full screen view, pressing TAB again will exit full screen mode. The 
arrow keys will scroll the image, the arrow keys will also scroll the STIS 
window contents at any time.

 SPACE - Top or update STIS window.

 W - close the top window.

 Only uncompressed PNT(Prism Paint) and TPI(TruePaint) files can be used, the 
next update will support the TIFF format. 
 If you have any questions, comments, or problems with this software please 
let me know. 
 Thank you Bobby, Lonny and Michael for your input on this project.

 STIS is shareware, if you find it usefull and keep using it then send 
whatever you think it is worth to register. You will receive support and the 
next update when it is ready.
 
 Phillip W. O'Neal
 6925 Waycross Ave.
 Tampa, Fl. 33619
