

DOCUMENTATION FOR "THE BIG LABELLER" (BIGLABEL.BSC), VERSION 1.45

     Though  many excellent labelling programs exist,  I  haven't 
yet  found one that gives exactly the results I would  like.  For 
example,   programs  for  addressing  envelopes  tend  to  be  so 
concerned  with  cramming information on to a sticky  label  that 
they  don't allow sufficient room for long  addresses.  I  prefer 
simply to print directly on to the envelope,  which means I'm not 
so limited by space.
     Because  of  this,  I  felt the need to  write  a  labelling 
program  that  would  suit  my  purposes;   though  designed  for 
labelling  envelopes there is no reason why it shouldn't be  used 
to  print  anything  with  a maximum of 10  lines  of  up  to  60 
characters.  For simplicity I'll treat it as an envelope  printer 
here.
     The  title,   "THE  BIG  LABELLER",   merely  reflects   the 
relatively  large  size of the labels the  program  can  produce, 
rather than over-inflated egotism on my part (honestly).
     As the program opens it issues prompts for a manual check to 
ensure  the printer is on-line,  with the envelope  in  position. 
     When the main screen appears three boxes will be seen;  from 
top to bottom, these are the output, message and input boxes. The 
message  box  will  prompt  you to type the  first  line  of  the 
address,  in to the input box.  On pressing RETURN or ENTER,  the 
contents  of the input box will be transferred to the first  line 
of the output box, and a prompt will be issued for the process to 
be  repeated for the second line.  Blank lines may be entered  by 
simply entering an empty string (ie. don't type anything in, just 
press  RETURN),  which  is essential if less than  10  lines  are 
needed.
     Once  the last line has been transferred to the  output  box 
the program will ask if the display is correct. If a line is seen 
to  contain an error then pressing "N" will invoke  a  correction 
process.  This  involves  entering  the number  of  the  line  in 
question  and re-typing the line.  This may be repeated  for  the 
same line, or others, until the output display is satisfactory.
     Once  the desired result has been achieved,  press  any  key 
(excepting "N"); this should give rise to a prompt that a further 
key-press  will activate the printer.  If the printer is not  on-
line an alert box is generated;  for simplicity,  it suggests the 
printer  hasn't  been  switched-on.  Once the  mistake  has  been 
rectified pressing RETURN will lead to a print-out.
     Once  the  address has been printed you will  be  offered  a 
chance  to print it again (press "Y").  Pressing any key but  "Y" 
will give the choice to quit ("Q"),  or print a different address 
(press any other key).
     As  far  as I can see,  this program should  work  with  any 
printer  (it  certainly  does with my  Epson  LX-800),  though  I 
obviously can't guarantee this. 
     Print  style (NLQ,  etc) can easily be selected by  altering 
the  printer  settings,  thus I felt it would  cause  unnecessary 
complications to do this via the program. 
     BIGLABEL.BSC was designed to be as user-friendly as possible 
and caters for as many errors as I could find.  Doubtless one  or 
two  bugs  exist  but these  should  be  trivial;  following  the 
instructions should suffice.
     Unfortunately,  the  program doesn't allow addresses  to  be 
saved to a data file,  though I may add a file-handling system in 
a more sophisticated future version.
     Quite  simply  the  mechanism by  which  BIGLABEL.BSC  works 
involves  holding the 10 entered strings as a dimensioned  string 
array, then using the LPRINT command to print them in sequence.
     The  rest  of the program consists mainly  of  routines  for 
screen graphics, error-handling and user-friendliness.

     BIGLABEL.BSC  is written in "COMPUTER CONCEPTS FAST  BASIC"; 
it is Public Domain material and may be copied and distributed in 
a non-profit-making manner.




     B. KING,
     Wallsend-on Tyne,
     England.
     Tel: Tyneside (091) 234 5369

     20th Sept. 1989.



