Atari Lynx is Holiday Smash HitThe Lynx, the world's first handheld full÷color video game system, began shipping in select locations just in time for the 1989 holiday season. Sales in New York City and through specific catalog outlets were a complete sell÷out, as expected by company executives.Lynx is the only portable unit available that features full÷color graphics and four÷channel sound. A number of retailers reported that they didn't even have a chance to get them out of shipping boxes and onto the shelves before they were sold out again.To keep pace with growing consumer demand, Atari will produce more and more Lynx game systems in 1990. According to an aggressive roll÷out and advertising plan, the system will be available in stores nationwide by mid÷year.'There's really no comparison between Lynx and other handheld games,' said Jim Fisher, vice president of marketing. 'In fact, the Lynx has faster animation and quicker game play than most television or computer systems. Lynx is really arcade÷quality color and action that you can take with you anywhere.'One of the Lynx's most exciting features is its multi÷player game capability. Players connect their systems using the ComLynx cable. The system hardware provides each player with a first÷person view of the action, including the ability to see and and affect the movements of the other players.Five game titles, California games, Blue Lightning, Gates of Zendocon, Electrocop, and Chips Challenge, are already available. More than 25 new titles are planned for introduction by Atari and third÷party developers this year. Among these is the arcade hit Gauntlet, with four player capacity.Lynx has a suggested list price of $179.95. Games are sold separately and have a suggested retail price of $34.99 and $39.99.Lynx Photo captions:The Atari Lynx's debut in New York City included advertising on the SpectraColor video board in Times Square. Millions of people standing along Broadway during the annual Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade and TV viewers across the nation had an opportunity to see Atari's ad. The lighted sign flashed the Atari Lynx message once÷a÷minute for two weeks.Stores throughout New York City did brisk business during the holiday season. Atari air÷lifted Lynx shipments to meet consumer demand. FAO Schwartz, New York City's largest toy store, consistently cleared Lynx from its shelves.######