                         RUNECASTER v1.0


                             by


                        Andy Norfolk

The Cottage, Crowan, Camborne, Cornwall, TR14 9NB   UK

Wolfmoon 1993 and Snowmoon 1994.



INTRO

You are responsible for your own fate (wyrd). I do not accept any responsibilityfor what happens to you or anything of yours if you use this programme. The
future is not fixed and can be altered by making the right choices. The runes,
like all other methods of divination, give advice on what MAY happen. It is all
up to you. You must inteprete what any throw of runes says based on your own
intuition and knowledge of your own circumstances. Do not just read the text
about a rune and think that thats it! Think about how the runes relate to each
other. Finally, please read any books you can find on runes. Other peoples' viewmay well differ from mine but may be just as valid. See the last bit of this docabout recommended books.


COPYRIGHT NOTICE

This programme is freeware. This means I retain the copyright and reserve all
rights to the programme and its contents. I spent a lot of time researching
all that went into it, so it seems not unreasonable to do this.

However, I am pleased to say that you can copy this programme and give it to
anyone you want to. The only thing I insist on is that all the files, including
this one, are copied together. This means you - PD Librarian - or anyone else.

You must have at least RNCASTER.PRG and RNCASTER.GET. I hope very much that you
also have RNCASTER.TXT which you should be reading now. I think there is a minorspace/time continuum paradox here! I also hope you have RNCASTER.LST which is
the source code in GFA Basic V3.6. If you don't like my programming style then
tell me. I really want to know.

If you like the programme please send me a postcard written in runes. See the
info alerts in the programme. Of course any contributions you might be moved to
send would be gratefully received. I will drink your health in mead.


WHAT RUNECASTER DOES

This programme will show you three traditional rune rows and an extended set
of runes. You can use it to learn the traditional order of the rows and the
meanings of each rune. Remember - the meanings given are MY interpretations
based on what I have found out about each rune from many sources. You can also
see and learn the three traditional rune poems that I have included. I have, so
far as I am able, retranslated these poems so that they make more sense to me.
There is more scope for this with longer verses. Finally you can use this
programme for divination using a choice of rune row and spread.


WHAT RUNES ARE

Runes are ancient and magical sets of letters each of which has many different
levels of meaning. It is NOT correct to refer to them as an alphabet. They do
not run in a b c order! The RUNE ROWS that survive are futhorcs or futharks.
These names reflect the order of the runes in the rows.

I have included the old English or Anglo-Saxon rune row, the Elder Norse rune
row and the Northumbrian rune row. Note that the extended Northumbrian runes I
have used in the programme include five runes that never appeared in any actual
row. These runes do however have recognised meanings but were probably used in
magical workings. Runes were used in constructing charms and spells of many
kinds.

I have given as much information as I felt like fitting into this programme
about rune rows. There is a Welsh writing system called COELBREN which is very
similar to runes. This system may or may not be authentic! I may include a row
of coelbren runes in a later version of this programme. There is no extant poem
or other guidance on the traditional meanings that coelbren letters may have hadwhich makes this difficult.

My own view is that the relevant verses of the rune poems, where these exist,
give the best guidance on the meanings of each rune. REMEMBER that there are
many levels of meaning. I have given a fairly mundane level of interpretation
in most cases. I have also included a hint about the deeper symbolism of each
rune where I thought it might aid your understanding of its meaning.


I would like to hear your comments on the programme and also my interpretations
of the meanings of the runes and of course of the rune poems. They are MY OWN. Iblame no-one else for them. I have not ripped off anyone else's interpretations
and feel strongly that other people's copyright should be respected  - as mine
should. I confess to having read a very large number of books on runes by many
different authors. If you detect the influence of any author on this programme
I will not be surprised.


I think the programme is self explanatory. If you can't understand how it works
I will be very surprised, but let me know if you have any problems.


Finally - the real purpose of this text file is to tell you not to rely on this
piece of software to teach you all about runes. I have said this already but youmust think beyond the, unfortunately brief, information I have been able to fit
in about each rune. You need to put some work into this. The interpretation of
any rune THAT WORKS FOR YOU is the right one.


Go read a few books:

Freya Aswynn        "Leaves of Yggdrasil"      brilliant
Edred Thorsson      "Futhark"
 "       "          "Runelore"                 both very good
Osborn and Longland "Rune Games"               good but confusing in parts
Michael Howard      "The Wisdom of the Runes"  a bit too mundane for my taste
Nigel Pennick       "Rune Magic"               superb as all Pennick's books areRalph Blum          I dont like his very idiosyncratic ideas - you might! I
                    suppose his inspirational interpretations are valid for him
                    and he's an interesting bloke 'cos I've met him but we don't                    agree - thats wyrd.


And now for the first time ever on the ST, and in Anglo Saxon, here is the
Old English rune poem.

Note "TH" indicates the letter thorn.

feoh :
byth frofur   fira gehwylcum.
Sceal THeah manna gehwylc   miclun hyt dlan
gif he wile for drihtne   domes hleotan.

ur:
byth anmod   ond oferhyrned,
felafrecne deor,   feohteth mid hornum,
mre morstapa;   thaet is modig wuht.

thorn:
byth THearle scearp;   THegna gehwylcum
anfeng ys yfyl,   ungemetun rethe
manna gehwylcum   THe him mid resteTH.

os:
byth ordfruma   lcre sprce,
wisdomes wrathu   ond witena frofur,
and eorla gehwam   eadnys ond tohiht.

rad:
byth on recyde   rinca gehwylcum
sefte, ond swithhwt   THam THe sitteth on ufan
mre mgenheardum   ofer milpathas.

cen:
byth cwicera gehwam   cuth on fyre,
blac ond beorhtlic,   byrneth oftust
THr hi thelingas   inne restath.

gyfu:
gumena byth   gleng and herenys,
wrathu and wyrthscype,   and wrcne gehwam
ar and twist   THe byth othra leas.

wyn:
bruceth   THe can weana lyt,
sares and sorge,   and him sylfa hfth
bld and blysse   and eac byrga geniht.

hgl:
byth hwitust corna;   hwyrft hit of heofones lyfte,
wealcath hit windes scura,
weorthen hit to wtere syTHTHan.

nyd:
byth nearu on breostan;   weortheth hi THeah oft nitha bearnum
to helpe and to hle gehwthre, gif hi his hlystan ror.

is:
byth oferceald,   ungemetum slidor,
glisnath glshluttur,   gimmum gelicust,
flor forste geworuht,   fger ansyne.

ger:
byth gumena hiht,   THonne God lteth,
halig heofones cyning,   hrusan syllan
beorhte bleda   beornum ond THearfum.

eoh:
byth utan   unsmethe treow,
heard, hrusan fst, hyrde fyres,
wyrtrumun underwrethyd,   wyn on ethle.

peorTH:
byth symble   plega and hlehter
wlancum .....   THar wigan sittath
on beorsele   blithe tsomne.

eolh:
eard hfth   oftust on fenne,
wexeTH on wature,   wundath grimme,
blode breneTH   beorna gehwylcne
THe him nigne   onfeng gedeTH.

sigel:
semannum   symble bith on hihte,
THonne hi hine feriath   ofer fisces beth,
oTH hi brimhengest   bringeth to lande.

tir:
bith tacna sum,   healdeTH trywa wel
with thelingas,   a bith on frylde,
ofer nihta genipu,   naefre swiceth.

beorc:
byth bleda leas,    bereth efne swa THeah
tanas butan tudder,   bith on telgum wlitig,
heah on helme   hrysted fgere,
geloden leafum,   lyfte getenge.

eh:
byth for eorlum   thelinga wyn,
hors hofum wlanc,   THr him hleth ymbe,
welege on wicgum,   wrixlath sprce,
and bith unstyllum   fre frofur.

man:
byth on myrgthe   his magan leof;
sceal theah anra gehwylc   oTHrum swican,
for THam dryhten wyle   dome sine
thaet earme flsc   eorthan betcan.

lagu:
byth leodum   langsum gethuht,
gif hi sculun nethan   on nacan tealtum,
and hi sytha   swythe bregath,
and se brimhengest   bridles ne gymeTH.

Ing:
ws rest   mid Eastdenum
gesewen secgun,   oth he siTHTHan eft
ofer wg gewat;   wn fter-ran;
THus Heardingas   THone hle nemdun.

ethel:
byth oferleof   ghwylcum men,
gif he mot THr rihtes   and gerysena on
brucan on bolde   bleadum oftast.

dg:
byth drihtnes sond,   deore mannum,
mre metodes leoht, myrgth and tohiht
eadgum and earmum,   eallum brice.

ac:
byth on eorthan   elda bearnum
flsces fodor, fereth gelome
ofer ganotes bth;   garsecg fandeth
hwther ac hbbe   thele treowe.

sc:
bith oferheah,   eldum dyre,
stith on stathule,   stede rihte hylt,
THeah him fehtan on   firas monige.

yr:
byth thelinga   and eorla gehws
wyn and wyrthmynd,   byth on wicge fger,
fstlic on frelde,   fyrdgeatewa sum.

iar:
byth eafix,   and THeah a bruceth
fodres on foldan,   hafath fgerne eard,
wtre beworpen,   THr he wynnum leofath.

ear:
byth egle   eorla gehwylcun,
THonne fstlice   flsc onginneth,
hraw colian,   hrusan ceosan
blac to gebeddan;   bleda gedreosath,
wynna gewitath,   wera geswicath.



Andy Norfolk   The Cottage, Crowan, Camborne, Cornwall, TR14 9NB, UK

Wolfmoon 1993 and Snowmoon 1994.


