   The STOS slideshow was written using STOS and compiled using the
STOS compiler. Although it can only display lo-rez pictures, It can be
loaded from a low or medium rez desktop.
   The STOS slideshow lets you view any picture files with the
extension PI1 or NEO. It does not only display the pictures. There are
different ways that the pictures appear and while the picture is on
the screen, an effect occurs. It is possible to hold the picture but
not at all times (See keyboard instructions in program). It's also
possible to store the pictures in memory so that you don't have to
leave the disk inside the drive. This could be used to show off your
artwork on ST's in shops or anywhere where there are ST's without
worrying about your disk being stolen. The number of pictures that the
computer can store depends upon the memory. A standard 520ST(FM) can
store six pictures. You could have one picture introducing yourself
with details of how to be contacted and the rest could be examples of
your work. You never know, someone from a software company who is
looking for a graphics artist may notice your work.
   Once the program has loaded, You will be asked if you would like to
view the pictures from the disk or store them in memory and view them
without the disk. If you choose to view the files off the disk, you
will see a stos fileselector. When you are in a directory with
pictures in it. Press return or click on the RETURN or QUIT boxes. All
the files in that directory will be displayed. If you choose to view
from memory, you will have to choose each picture file individually.
Only files with PI1 and NEO extensions can be used, you wuill be
warned when you choose something else. You will then be asked if these
pictures are the right ones. The pictures will then be loaded and when
the first one begins to appear, the loading would have finished and
you can remove your disk and hope that people will notice your
artistic talents.

Files :   STOSSHOW.PRG (Main program)
          STOSSHOW.BAS (Source code in STOS (Might not be included))
          STOSSHOW.DOC (This document)

Good luck !!!!!!!!!!!
