XaAES Compatibility List
----
Now, don't laugh.....

Programs that I've got to work (to the extent that they can be used a bit) under
XaAES. Other programs may well work, but these are the ones that I
have tried myself.....

First, the obvious ones ('coz I wrote them):
DUftp
CLAv3

Now, some MiNT specific ones:
TOSWIN (Warwick's version)
TOSWIN (Julian Coleman's tw100 version of Warwick's version of Eric's original)
TOSWIN (Chris Ridd's version)
 - All versions of TOSWIN work perfectly now.
PS Control

And some other:
Lattice C (still a few problems with the dialogs, but a real improvement now text fields
            are working properly)
Pure C (a bit, but I don't reckomend using the debugger with XaAES)
HiSoft Basic (problems with the dialogs, but editor is fine)
Devpac3 (one or two problems with the dialogs, but editor is fine)
Calapt (by Atari)
Yukon (solitaire game - 100%)
Clock (round clock that came with MultiTOS - works perfectly)
Z'org (works almost perfectly)
Ideaform (works perfectly)
Ideabook (works perfectly)
Gemview (works fine)
Viewer (text viewer that came with MultiTOS - works perfectly)
Pagestream (works pretty well if you limit the memory)
Kivi QWK (dialog interaction doesn't work)
Edith (works pretty well - esp. as it has a built in fileselector).
ST-Guide (works perfectly, except clicks on the icons are a bit iffy)
Xcontrol (run as a prg - pretty buggy really...)
Thing 0.59 (pretty much runs fine)
QED (editor works fine - but dialogs hang the system?)
CAB
Bootconf (Uwe Siemat's falcon boot setup program - works perfectly)
PC_Shell (alternative shell for Pure C)
Kandinsky v2.01 (works pretty well, but cann't edit stuff 'coz of lack of MU_M1/2 modes)
Interface (at some point this started working fine, but I've got no idea what got fixed
           to make it happen).
Stalker (dialogs lock up)                                
Junior Office (Fax software)
AntMail (Dan Ackerman's POP3 Mailler for STiK)
7UP v2.3 (text editor)
ST-Zip 2.6
Tempus Word
ToDo
Movie100 (Brainstorm's FLI movie player - works rather well)
Lines.prg (atari's trivial little program - took bloody ages to get this working, thankyou
           Martin for that fix).
Oasis (Demon's Internet Mail/News system)
Selectric (Alternative File Selector - absolute essential until I get round to the 
           internal one)
Everest (text editor)
MGIF5 (Johan's GIF viewer - has loads of dialog problems, but at least it doesn't crash
       now)
Egale
Cubase 3 (ok, not usable really - but it does load & run for a while before crashing)
