Short description of ApfelImg, as of: 18.09.1996
------------------------------------------------

ApfelImg is an external picture module for Thing from Version 1.08 on; 
it calculates random fractal tiles, which then fill Thing's desktop.

Using it is easy: Copy APFELIMG.OVL into Thing's start directory and 
rename it to THINGIMG.OVL (the original module of this name should be 
saved elsewhere first, or re-named). If desired one can also create an 
APFELIMG.INF (you will find an explanation about this in the sample file 
in this directory). Those using a computer with a 68020 CPU or better 
should use the faster APFEL020.OVL in place of APFELIMG.OVL.

If you now open Thing's 'Configuration...' dialogue ('Extras' menu), 
activate 'Use image' in the 'Background image' area on the 'Desktop' page 
and quit the dialogue with 'OK', then instead of a finished picture a 
random portion of the well-known fractal graphic will be calculated. 
Depending on the computer type, size of the portion and set picture size 
this can easily take several minutes. If one has set the 'Centre image' 
option, then only a small picture in the centre of the desktop will be 
displayed, of course. For tiling the whole desktop area, 'Centre image' 
must not be active. The 'Use image palette' option as well as the image 
'File' have no meaning when ApfelImg is used.

Of course ApfelImg is not a particularly meaningful module, specially as 
it is not exactly fast in action. But it illustrates nicely that, with 
external modules, Thing is not limited just to loading ready-made 
pictures. Someone could also design a module, say, to load a random image 
from a pool of graphics (a kind of 'Picture of the day' module).

Anyone interesting in writing their own image module for Thing (that of 
course can also load quite 'normal' pictures of a given format), should 
get in touch with me. A basic condition, though, is that the finished 
module should be freeware, and in its original condition (i.e. before 
copying to the Thing folder) is not called THINGIMG.OVL. Any INF-file 
included may also not be called THINGIMG.INF, since these two names are 
reserved for the module by Thomas Knneth included with Thing.

My address:

Thomas Binder
Johann-Valentin-May-Straže 7
64665 Alsbach-H„hnlein

EMail: binder@rbg.informatik.tu-darmstadt.de (InterNet)
       gryf@hrz.tu-darmstadt.de (ditto)
       Thomas Binder @ HD (MausNet, no mails > 16K!)

