                           by Tim Oren

                     Topic: Windows, part II
                             10/21/85


                            EXCELSIOR!

  In this installment, we continue the exploration of GEM's window
manager by finding out how to process the messages received by an
application when it has a window defined on the screen.

  Also, beginning with this column, sample C code demonstrating the
techniques discussed will be available on SIG*ATARI in DL5.  This
will allow you to download the code without interference by the CIS
text-formatter used by ANTIC ONLINE output.

  The file for this column is GEMCL2.XMO.  All references  to non-GEM
routines in this column refer to this file.  Please note that  these
files will not contain entire programs.  Instead, they consist of
small pieces of utility code which you may copy and modify in your
own  programs.

                        REDRAWING WINDOWS

  One of the most misunderstood parts of GEM is the correct method for
drawing within a window.  Most requests for redrawing are generated
by the GEM system, and arrive as messages (read with evnt_multi)
which contain the handle of the window, and the screen rectangle
which is  "dirty" and needs to be redrawn.

  Screen areas may become dirty as a result of windows being closed,
sized down, or moved, thus "exposing" an area underneath.  The
completion of  a dialog, or closing of a desk accessory may also free
up a screen area which needs to be redrawn.  When GEM detects the
presence of a dirty rectangle,  it checks its list of open windows,
and sends the application a redraw message  for each of its windows
which intersects the dirty area.

                          CAVEAT EMPTOR

  GEM does not "clip" the rectangle which it sends to  the application;
that is, the rectangle may not lie entirely within the  portion of
the window which is exposed on the screen.  It is the job of the
application to determine in what portion of the rectangle it may
safely draw.   This is done by examining the "rectangle list"
associated with the window.

  A rectangle list is maintained by GEM for each active window.  It
contains the portions of the window's interior which are exposed,
i.e., topmost, on the screen and within which the app may draw.

  Let's consider an example to make this clear.  Suppose an app has
opened two windows, and there are no desk accessory windows open. The
window which is topmost will  always have only one rectangle in its
list.  If the two are separate on the  screen, then the second window
will also have one rectangle.  If they overlap,  then the top window
will "break" the rectangle of the bottom one.  If the  overlap is at
a corner, two rectangles will be generated for the bottom window.  If
the overlap is on a side only, then three rectangles are required to
cover  the exposed portion of the bottom window.  Finally, if the
first window is  entirely within the second, it requires four
rectangles in the list to tile the second window.

  Try working out a few rectangle examples with pencil and paper to
get the feel of it.  You will see that the possible combinations with
more  than two windows are enormous.  This, by the way, is the reason
that GEM does  not send one message for each rectangle on the list:
With multiple windows,  the number of messages generated would
quickly fill up the application's message queue.

  Finally, note that every app MUST use this method, even if it only
uses a single window, because there may be desk accessories with
their own  windows in the system at the same time.  If you do not use
the rectangle lists, you may overwrite an accessory's window.

                          INTO THE BITS

  First, we should note that the message type for a  redraw request is
WM_REDRAW, which is stored in msg[0], the first location of the
message returned by evnt_multi.  The window handle is stored in
msg[3].  These locations are the same for all of the message types
being discuss.  The rectangle which needs to be redrawn is stored in
msg[4] through msg[7].

  Now let's examine the sample redraw code in more detail. The redraw
loop is bracketed with mouse off and mouse on calls.  If you forget
to do  this, the mouse pointer will be over-written if it is within
the window and  the next movement of the mouse will leave a
rectangular blotch on the screen  as a piece of the "old" screen is
incorrectly restored.

  The other necessary step is to set the window update flag.  This
prevents the menu manager from dropping a menu on top of the screen
portion being redrawn.  You must release this flag at the end of the
redraw, or the you will be unable to use any menus afterwards.

  The window rectangles are retrieved using a get-first, get-next
scheme which will be familiar if you have used the GEM DOS or PC-DOS
wildcard file calls.  The end of the rectangle list has been reached
when both the width and height returned are zero.  Since some part of
a  window might be off-screen (unless you have clamped its position -
see below), the retrieved rectangle is intersected with the desktop's
area,  and then with the screen area for which a redraw was
requested.

  Now you have the particular area of the screen in which it is  legal
to draw.  Unless there is only one window in your application, you
will have to test the handle in the redraw request to figure out what
to  put in the rectangle.

  Depending on the app, you may be drawing an AES  object tree, or
executing VDI calls, or some combination of the two.  In  the AES
case, the computed rectangle is used to specify the bounds of the
objc_draw.  For VDI work, the rectangle is used to set the clipping
area before executing the VDI calls.

                        A SMALL CONFESSION

  At the beginning of this discussion, I  deliberately omitted one
class of redraws: those initiated by the application  itself.

  In some cases a part of the screen must be redrawn immediately to
give feedback to the user following a keystroke, button, or mouse
action.   In these cases, the application could call do_redraw
directly, without  waiting for a message.

  The only time you can bypass do_redraw, and draw  without walking the
rectangle list, is when you can be sure that the target  window is on
top, and that the figure being drawn is entirely contained  within
it.

  In many cases, however, an application initiated redraw happens
because of a computed change, for instance, a spreadsheet update, and
its timing is not crucial.  In this instance, you may wish to have
the  app send ITSELF a redraw request.

  The main advantage of this approach  is that the AES is smart enough
to see if there is already a redraw request for the same window in
the queue, and, if so, to merge the requests by  doing a union of
their rectangles.  In this fashion, the "blinky" appearance of
multiple redraws is avoided, without the need to include logic for
merging redraws within the program.

  A utility routine for sending the "self-redraw" is included in the
down-load for this article.

                     WINDOW CONTROL REQUESTS

  An application is notified by the AES, via the message system, when
the user manipulates one of the window control points.  Remember that
you must have specified each control point when the window was
created, or will not receive the associated control message.

  The most important thing to understand about window control is that
the change which the user requested does not take place until the
application forwards it to the AES.  While this makes for a little
extra work,  it gives the program a chance to intervene and validate
or modify the request to suit.

  A second thing to keep in mind is that not all window updates cause a
redraw request to be generated for the window, because the AES
attempts to save time with raster moves on the screen.

  Now let's look at each window control request in detail.  The
message code for a window move is WM_MOVED.  If you are willing to
accept  any such request, just do:

  wind_set(wh, WF_CXYWH, msg[4], msg[5], msg[6], msg[7]);

  (Remember that wh, the window handle, is always in msg[3]).

  The AES will not request a redraw of the window following this call,
unless the window is being moved from a location which is partially
"off-screen". Instead, it will do a "blit" (raster copy) of the
window and its contents to the new location without intervention by
the app.

  There are two constraints which you may often wish to apply to  the
user's move request.  The first is to force the new location to lie
entirely within the desktop, rather than partially off-screen.  You
can do this with the rc_constrain utility by executing:

  rc_constrain(&full, &msg[4]);

before making the wind_set call.  (Full is assumed to contain the
desktop dimensions.)

  The second common constraint is to "snap" the x-dimension location of
the new location to a word boundary.  This operation will speed up
GEM's "blit" because no shifting or masking will need to be done
when moving the window.  To perform this operation, use align()
before the  wind_set call:

  msg[4] = align(msg[4], 16);

  The message code for a window size request is WM_SIZED.  Again, if
you are willing to accept any request, you can just "turn it around"
with the same wind_set call as given for WM_MOVED.

  Actually, GEM enforces a couple of constraints on sizing.  First, the
window may not be sized off screen.  Second, there is a minimum
window size which is dependent on the window components specified
when it was created.  This prevents features like scroll arrows from
being squeezed into oblivion.

  The most common application constraint on sizing is to snap the size
to horizontal words (as above) and/or vertical character lines.  In
the latter case, the vertical dimension of the output font is used
with align().

  Also,  be aware that the size message which you receive specifies the
EXTERNAL  dimensions of the window.  To assure an "even" size for the
INTERNAL dimensions, you must make a wind_calc call to compute them,
use align() on the computed values, back out the corresponding
external dimensions with the reverse wind_calc, and then make the
wind_set call with this set of values.

  A window resize will only cause a redraw request for the window if
the size is being increased in at least one dimension.  This is
satisfactory for most applications, but if you must "reshuffle" the
window after a  size-down, you should send yourself a redraw (as
described above) after you make the wind_set call.  This will
guarantee that the display is updated correctly.  Also note that the
sizing or movement of one window may cause redraw requests to be
generated for other windows which are uncovered by the change.

  The window full request, with code WM_FULLED, is actually a toggle.
If the window is already at its full size (as specified in the
wind_create), then this is a request to shrink to its previous size.
If the window is currently small, then the request is to grow to full
size.

  Since the AES records the current, previous, and maximum window size,
you can use  wind_get calls to determine which situation pertains.
The hndl_full utility in the down-load (modified from Doodle), shows
how to do this.

  The "zoom box" effects when changing size are optional, and can be
removed  to speed things up.  Again, if the window's size is
decreasing, no redraw is  generated, so you must send yourself one if
necessary.  You should not have  to perform any constraint or "snap"
operations here, since (presumably) the  full and previous sizes have
had these checks applied to them already.

  The WM_CLOSED message is received when the close box is clicked. What
action you perform depends on the application.  If you want to remove
the window, use wind_close as described in the last column.  In many
applications, however, the close message may indicate that a file is
to be saved, or a directory or editing level is to be closed.  In
these cases, the message is used to trigger this action before or
instead of the wind_close.  (Folders on the Desktop are an example of
this situation.)

  The WM_TOPPED message indicates that the AES wants to bring the
indicated window to the "top" and make it active.  This happens if
the user clicks within a window which is not on top, or if the
currently topped window is closed by its application or desk
accessory.  Normally, the application should respond to this message
with:

  wind_set(wh, WF_TOP, 0, 0);

and allow the process to complete.

  In a few instances, a window may be used in an output only mode, such
as a status display, with at least one other window present for
input.  In this case, a WM_TOPPED message for the status window may
be ignored.  In all other cases, you must handle the WM_TOPPED
message even if your application has only one window: Invocation of a
desk accessory could always place another window on top.  If you fail
to do so, subsequent redraws for your window may not be processed
correctly.

                      WINDOW SLIDER MESSAGES

  If you specify all of the slider bar parts for your window, you may
receive up to five different message types for each of the two sets
of sliders.  To simplify things a little, I will discuss everything
in terms of the vertical (right hand side) sliders.  If you are also
using the horizontal sliders, the same techniques will work, just use
the alternate mnemonics.

  The WM_VSLID message indicates that the user has dragged the slider
bar within its box, indicating a new relative position within the
document.  Along with the window handle, this message includes the
relative position between 1 and 1000 in msg[4].

  Recall from last column's discussion that this interval corresponds
to the "freedom of movement" of the slider. If you want to accept the
user's request, just make the call:

  wind_set(wh, WF_VSLIDE, msg[4], 0, 0, 0);

  (Corresponding horizontal mnemonics are WM_HSLID and WF_HSLIDE).

  Note that this wind_set call will not cause a redraw message to be
sent.  You must update the display to reflect the new scrolled
position, either by executing a redraw directly, or by sending
yourself a message.

  If the document within the window has some structure, you may not
wish to accept all slider positions.  Instead you may want to force
the scroll position to the nearest text line (for instance).  Using
terms defined in the last column, you may convert the slider position
to "document units" with:

  top_wind = msg[4] * (total_doc - seen_doc) / 1000 + top_doc

  (This will probably require 32-bit arithmetic).

  After rounding off or otherwise modifying the request, convert it
back to slider units and make the WF_VSLIDE request.

  The other four slider requests all share one message code:
WM_ARROWED.  They are distinguished by sub-codes stored in msg[4]:
WA_UPPAGE, WA_DNPAGE, WA_UPLINE, and WA_DNLINE.  These are produced
by clicking above and below the slider, and on the up and down
arrows, respectively.  (I have no idea why sub-codes were used in
this one instance.)  The corresponding horizontal slider codes are:
WA_LFPAGE, WA_RTPAGE, WA_LFLINE, and WA_RTLINE.

  What interpretation you give to these requests will depend on  the
application.  In the most common instance, text documents, the
customary method is to change the top of window position (top_wind)
by  one line for a WA_UPLINE or WA_DNLINE, and by seen_doc (the
number of lines in the window) for a WA_UPPAGE or WA_DNPAGE.

  After making the change, compute a new slider position, and make the
wind_set call as given above.  If the document's length is not an
even multiple of "lines" or "pages" you will have to be careful that
incrementing or  decrementing top_wind does not exceed its range of
freedom: top_doc to (top_doc + total_doc - seen_doc).

  If you have such an odd size document, you will also have to make a
decision on whether to violate the line positioning rule so that the
slider may be put at its bottom-most position, or to follow the rule
but make it impossible to get the slider to the extreme of its range.

                           A COMMON BUG

  It is easy to forget that user clicks are not the only things that
affect slider position.  If the window size changes as a result of a
WM_SIZED or WM_FULLED message, the app must also  update its sliders
(if they are present).  This is a good reason to keep the top of
window information in "document units".

  You can just redo the position calculation with the new "seen_doc"
value, and call  wind_set.  Also remember that changing the size of
the underlying document  (adding or deleting a bottom line, for
instance) must also cause the sliders  to be adjusted.

                      DEPT. OF DIRTY TRICKS

  There are two remaining window calls which are useful to advanced
programmers.  They require techniques which I have not yet discussed,
so you may need to file them for future reference.

  The AES maintains a quarter-screen sized buffer which is used to save
the area under alerts and menu drop-downs.  It is occasionally useful
for the application to gain access to this buffer for its own use in
saving screen areas with raster copies.  To do so, use:

  wind_get(0, WF_SCREEN, &loaddr, &hiaddr, &lolen, &hilen);

  Hiaddr and loaddr are the top and bottom 16-bits (respectively) of
the  32-bit address of the buffer.  Hilen and lolen are the two
halves of  its length.

  Due to a preculiarity of the binding you have to reassemble  these
pieces before using them.  (The actual value of WF_SCREEN is 17; this
does not appear in some versions of the GEMDEFS.H file.)

  If you use this buffer, you MUST prevent menus from dropping down by
using either the BEG_UPDATE or BEG_MCTRL wind_update calls.  Failure
to do so will result in your data being destroyed.  Remember to use
the matching wind_update: END_UPDATE or END_MCTRL, when you are done.

  The other useful call enables you to replace the system's desktop
definition with a resource of your choosing.  The call:

  wind_set(0, WF_NEWDESK, tree, 0, 0);

where tree is the 32-bit address of the object tree, will cause the
AES to draw your definition instead of the usual gray or green
background. Not only that, it will continue to redraw this tree with
no intervention on your part.

  Obviously, the new definition must be carefully built to fit the
desktop area exactly or garbage will be left around the edges.  For
the truly sophisticated, a user-defined object could be used in this
tree, with the result that your application's code would be entered
from the AES whenever the desktop was redrawn.  This would allow you
to put VDI pictures or complex images onto the desktop background.

                        A SIN OF OMISSION

  In the last column, I neglected to mention that strings whose
addresses are passed in the WF_NAME and WF_INFO  wind_set calls must
be allocated in a static data area.  Since the AES remembers the
addresses (not the characters), a disaster may result if the storage
has been reused when the window manager next attempts to draw the
window title area.

                          COMING SOON...

  This concludes our tour of GEM's basic window management techniques.
There have been some unavoidable glimpses of paths not yet taken
(forward references), but we will return in time.

  On our next excursion, we will take a look at techniques for handling
simple dialog boxes, and start exploring the mysteries of resources
and object trees.
