                           *PROFESSIONAL GEM*
                               By Tim Oren
                       Column #7 - Menu Structures

    HAPPY NEW YEAR!  This  is  article  number  seven  in  the ST PRO GEM
series, and  the  first  for  1986.   In  this  installment,  I  will  be
discussing GEM menu structures and how  to  use them in your application.
There is  also a  short  Feedback  response  section.   You will find the
download file containing the code for this column in the file GEMCL7.C in
DL3 of the ATARI16 SIG (PCS-58).

    MENU BASICS.  In ST GEM, the menu consists of a bar across the top of
the screen which displays several  sub-menu  titles.  Touching one of the
titles causes it to highlight and  an  associated "drop-down" to be drawn
directly below on the screen.  This  drop-down may be dismissed by moving
to another title, or by clicking the mouse off of the drop-down.


    To make a selection, the  mouse  is  moved  over the drop-down.  Each
valid selection is highlighted when  the  mouse touches it.  Clicking the
mouse  while over one  of  these  selections  picks  that item.  GEM then
undraws the drop-down, and sends a message to your application giving the
object number  of the title bar entry, and the object number of the drop-
down item which  were selected by the  user.  The selected title entry is
left highlighted  while your code processes the request.

    MENU STRUCTURES.  The data  structure  which  defines  a  GEM menu is
(surprise!) an object tree, just  like  the  dialogs  and panels which we
have discussed before.  However, the  operations  of the GEM menu manager
are quite different from  those  of  the  form  manager,  so the internal
design of the menu tree has some curious constraints.

    The best way  to  understand  these  constraints  is  to  look  at an
example.  The first item in the  download  is the object structure (only)
of the menu tree from the GEM Doodle/Demo sample application.

    The ROOT of a  menu  tree  is  sized  to  fit  the entire screen.  To
satisfy the visual hierarchy principle  (see  article  #5), the screen is
divided into two parts:  THE  BAR,  containing  the  menu titles, and THE
SCREEN, while contains the drop-downs when they are drawn.  Each of these
areas is defined by an object of the same name, which are the only two
objects linked directly below the ROOT  of  a menu tree.  You will notice
an important implication of this  structure:   The  menu titles and their
associated drop-downs are stored  in  entirely  different subtrees of the
menu!

    While examining THE BAR in the  example  listing, you may notice that
its OB_HEIGHT is very large (513).   In hexadecimal this is 0x0201.  This
defines a height for THE BAR  of  one  character plus two pixels used for
spacing.  THE BAR and its subtree are the only objects which are drawn on
the screen in the menu's quiescent state.

    The only offspring object  of  THE  BAR  is  THE ACTIVE.  This object
defines the part of THE BAR which  is covered by menu titles.  The screen
rectangle belonging to THE ACTIVE is used  by the GEM screen manager when
it  waits for the mouse to enter  an  active menu title.  Notice that THE
ACTIVE and its offspring also have OB_HEIGHTs with pixel residues.

    The actual menu titles are linked  left  to  right in order below THE
ACTIVE.  Their OB_Xs and OB_WIDTHs are  arranged so that they  completely
cover THE ACTIVE.  Normally,  the  title  objects  are  typed  G_TITLE, a
special type which  assures  that  the  title  bar  margins are correctly
drawn.

    THE SCREEN is the parent  object  of  the drop-down boxes themselves.
They are linked left to right in an order identical with their titles, so
that the menu manager can  make  the  correct correspondence at run-time.
The OB_X of each drop-down  is  set  so  that  it is positioned below its
title on the screen.

    Notice that it is  safe  to  overlap  the  drop-downs  within a menu,
since only one of  them  will  be  displayed  at  any  time. There is one
constraint on the boxes however:  They must  be no greater than a quarter
screen in total size.  This  is  the  size  of the off-screen blit buffer
which is used by GEM to store  the  screen contents when the drop-down is
drawn.  If you exceed this size,  not  all the screen under the drop-down
will be restored, or the ST may crash!

    The entries within  a  drop-down  are  usually  G_STRINGs,  which are
optimized for  drawing  speed.   The  rectangles  of  these  entries must
completely cover the drop-down, or the  entire drop-down will be inverted
when the mouse touches an  uncovered  area!  Techniques for using objects
other than G_STRINGs are discussed later in this column.

    The first title and  its  corresponding  drop-down  are special.  The
title name, by  custom,  is  set  to  DESK.   The  drop-down must contain
exactly  eight G_STRING objects.  The first (again by custom) is the INFO
entry,  which usually leads to  a  dialog displaying author and copyright
information for your application.   The  next  is  a  separator string of
dashes with the DISABLED flag set.   The  following six objects are dummy
strings which GEM fills in with  the  names of desk accessories when your
menu is loaded.

    The purpose of this  description  of  menu  trees  is  to give you an
understanding of what lies "behind the scenes" in the next section, which
describes the run-time menu  library  calls.   In  practice, the Resource
Construction Set provides "blank menus" which include all of the required
elements and it also enforces the constraints on internal structure.  You
only need to worry about these if you modify the menu tree "on-the-fly".

    USING THE MENU.  Once you have loaded the application's resource, you
can ask the AES to install your menu.   You must first get the address of
the menu tree within the resource using :-

    rsrc_gaddr(R_TREE, MENUTREE, &ad_menu);

 assuming that MENUTREE is the name  you  gave  the  menu in the RCS, and
that ad_menu is a LONG which will receive the address.  Then you call the
AES to establish the menu :-

    menu_bar(ad_menu, TRUE);

 At this point, the AES draws your menu bar on the screen and animates it
when the user moves the mouse into the title area.

    The AES indicates that the user has  made a menu selection by sending
your application a message.  The message type is MN_SELECTED,  which will
be stored in msg[0],  the  first  location  in  the  message  returned by
evnt_multi().

    The AES also stores the object  number  of the selected menu's  title
in msg[3], and the object  number  of  the  selected menu item in msg[4].
Generally, your application  will  process  menu  messages  with nested C
switch statements. The outer  switch  will  have  one  case for each menu
title, and the inner switch statements  will  have  a case for each entry
within the selected menu.  (This  implies  that  you  must give a name to
each title and to each menu entry when you create the menu in the RCS.)

    After the user has made a menu selection, the AES leaves the title of
the chosen menu in reverse  video  to  indicate  that your application is
busy processing the  message.   When  you  done  with  whatever action is
indicated, you need to return the title  to  a normal state. This is done
with :-

    menu_tnormal(ad_menu, msg[3], TRUE);

(Remember that msg[3] is the title's object number.)

    When your application is  ready  to  terminate,  it should delete its
menu bar.  Do this with the call :-

    menu_bar(ad_menu, FALSE);

    GETTING FANCY.  The techniques  above  represent  the bare minimum to
handle menus.  In most cases,  however,  you  will  want your menus to be
more "intelligent" in displaying the  user's  options.  For instance, you
can prevent many user errors  by  disabling inappropriate choices, or you
can save space on drop-downs by  showing  only  one line for a toggle and
altering its text or placing and removing  a check mark when the state is
changed.  This section discusses these and other advanced techniques.

    It is a truism of user  interface  design  that  the best way to deal
with an error is not  to  let  it  happen  in  the first place.  It  many
cases, you can apply this  principle  to  GEM menus by disabling  choices
which should  not  be  used.   If  your  application  uses  a  "selection
precedes action" type of interface, the type of object selected may  give
the information needed  to  do  this.    Alternately,  the  state  of the
underlying program may render certain menu choices illegal.

    GEM provides a call to disable  and  re-enable menu options. The call
is :-

    menu_ienable(ad_menu, ENTRY, FALSE);

 to disable a selection.  The entry will  be grayed out when it is drawn,
and will not invert under the mouse and will not be selected by the user.
Substituting TRUE for FALSE re-enables the option.  ENTRY is the name  of
the object which is being affected, as assigned in the RCS.

    Note that menu_ienable() will not  normally  affect the appearance or
operation of menu  TITLE  entries.   However,  there  is  an undocumented
feature which allows this.  If ENTRY is  replaced by the object number of
a title bar entry with its top  bit set, then the entire associated drop-
down will  be  disabled  or  re-enabled  as  requested,  and  the title's
appearance will be changed.  But,  be  warned  that  this feature did not
work reliably in some early versions of GEM.   Test it on your copy of ST
GEM, and use it with caution  when  you  cannot control the version under
which your application may run.

    It is also possible to disable  menu entries by directly altering the
DISABLED attribute within the OB_STATE  word. The routines enab_obj() and
disab_obj() in the download show how this is done.  They are also used in
set_menu(), which follows them immediately.

    Set_menu()  is  a  utility  which   is   useful   when  you  wish  to
simultaneously enable or  disable  many  entries  in  the  menu  when the
program's state changes or a new object  is selected by the user.   It is
called with :-

    set_menu(ad_menu, vector);

 where vector is a pointer to an  array  of WORDs.  The first word of the
array determines the default state of menu  entries.  If it is TRUE, then
set_menu() enables all  entries  in  every  drop-down  of  the menu tree,
except that the DESK drop-down is unaffected.  If it is FALSE, then every
menu entry is disabled.

    The following entries in the  array  are  the numbers of menu entries
which are to be toggled to the reverse of the default state. This list is
terminated by a zero entry.

    The advantage  of  set_menu()  is  that  it  allows  you  to  build a
collection of menu state  arrays,  and  associate  one  with each type of
user-selected object, program state, and  so  on.  Changing the status of
the menu tree may then be accomplished with a single call.

    CHECK, PLEASE?  One type of state  indicator which may appear  within
a drop-down is a checkmark next to  an  entry. You can add the  checkmark
with the call :-

    menu_icheck(ad_menu, ENTRY, TRUE);

 and remove it by replacing the TRUE  with FALSE.  As above, ENTRY is the
name of the menu entry  of  interest.   The  checkmark appears inside the
left boundary of the entry object, so leave some space for it.

    The menu_icheck() call is actually changing  the state of the CHECKED
flag within the entry  object's  OB_STATE  word.   If  necessary, you may
alter the flag directly using do_obj() and undo_obj() from the download.

    NOW YOU SEE IT, NOW YOU  DON'T.   You  can also alter the text  which
appears in a  particular  menu  entry  (assuming  that  the  entry  is  a
G_STRING object).  The call :-

    menu_text(ad_menu, ENTRY, ADDR(text));

 will substitute  the  null-terminated  string  pointed  to  by  text for
whatever is currently in  ENTRY.   Remember  to  make  the drop-down wide
enough to handle the largest  text  string  which you may substitute.  In
the interests  of  speed,  G_STRINGs  drawn  within  drop-downs  are  not
clipped, so you may get garbage characters  on  the desktop if you do not
size the drop-down properly!

    The menu_text() call actually alters  the  OB_SPEC  field of the menu
entry object to point to the  string  which  you specify.  Since the menu
tree is a static data structure which may be directly accessed by the AES
at any time, be sure  that  the  string  is also statically allocated and
that it is not modified without first  being delinked from the menu tree.
Failure to do this may result  in  random  crashes when the user accesses
the drop-down!

    LUNCH AND DINNER  MENUS.   Some  applications  may  have  such a wide
range of operations that they need  more  than  one menu bar at different
times.  There is no problem  with  having  more  than  one menu tree in a
resource, but the AES can only keep  track  of one at a time.  Therefore,
to switch menus you  need  to  use  menu_bar(ad_menu1, FALSE); to release
the first menu, then  use  menu_bar(ad_menu2,  TRUE);  to load the second
menu tree.

    Changing the entire menu is  a  drastic action.  Out of consideration
for your user, it should be  associated  with some equally obvious change
in the application which has  just  been  manually requested.  An example
might be changing from  spreadsheet  to  data  graphing  mode in a multi-
function program.

    DO IT YOURSELF.  In a future  column,  I  will  discuss how to set up
user-defined drawing objects.  If  you  have  already discovered them  on
your own, you can use them within a drop-down or as a title entry.

    If the user-defined  object  is  within  a  drop-down, its associated
drawing code will be called once  when  the  drop-down is first drawn. It
will then be called in "state-change"  mode when the entry is highlighted
(inverted).  This  allows  you  to   use  non-standard  methods  to  show
selection, such as outlines.

    If you try to  insert  a  user-defined  object  within the menu title
area, remember that the G_TITLE  object  which you are replacing includes
part of the dark margin of the bar. You will need to experiment with your
object drawing code to replicate this effect.

    MAKE PRETTY.  There are a number of menu formatting conventions which
have become standard  practice.   Using  these  gives  your application a
recognizable "look-and-feel" and  helps  users  learn  it.  The following
section reviews these conventions, and supplies a few hints and tricks to
obtain a better appearance for you menus.

    The second drop-down  is  customarily  used  as  the  FILE  menu.  It
contains options related to  loading  and  saving  the  files used by the
application,  as  well  as  entries   for   clearing  the  workspace  and
terminating the program.

    You should avoid crowding the  menu  bar.   Leave  a couple of spaces
between each entry, and try not  to  use  more  than 70% of the bar.  Not
only does this look better, but you  will  have space for longer words if
you translate your application to a foreign language.

    Similarly, avoid cluttering menu drop-downs.   Try to keep the number
of options to no more than ten  unless  they are clearly related, such as
colors.  Separate  off  dissimilar  entries  with  the  standard disabled
dashes line.  (If you  are  using  set_menu(),  remember  to consider the
separators when setting up the state vectors.)

    If the number of options grows beyond  this  bound, it may be time to
move them to a dialog box.  If so,  it  is a convention to put three dots
following each menu entry which leads  to  a dialog. Also, allow a margin
on the menu entries. Two  leading  blanks  and  a minimum of one trailing
blank is standard, and allows room for checkmarks if they are used.

    Dangerous menu options should be  far  away from common used entries,
and are best separated  with  dashed  lines.   Such options should either
lead to a confirming  go/no-go  alert,  or  should have associated "undo"
options.

    After you have finished defining a  menu  drop-down with the RCS,  be
sure that its  entries  cover  the  entire  box.  Then  use ctrl-click to
select the drop-down itself, and  SORT  the  entries top to bottom.  This
way the drop-down draws in smoothly top to bottom.

    Finally, it is possible  to  put  entries  other  than G_STRINGs into
drop-downs.  In the RCS, you will  need  to import them via the clipboard
from the Dialog mode.

    Some non-string object, such as icons and images, will look odd  when
they are inverted  under  the  mouse.   There  is  a  standard  trick for
dealing with this problem.  Insert the  icon or whatever in the drop-down
first.  Then get a G_IBOX  object  and  position  and  size it so that it
covers the first object as well as  the  extra  area you would like to be
inverted.

    Edit the G_IBOX to remove its  border,  and assign the entry name  to
it.  Since the menu manager uses  objc_find(),  it will detect and invert
this second object when the mouse moves into the drop-down.  (To see why,
refer to article #5.) Finally, DO NOT SORT a drop-down which has been set
up this way!

    THAT'S IT  FOR  NOW!   The  next  column  will  discuss  some  of the
principles of designing GEM  interfaces  for  applications. This topic is
irreverantly known as GEM mythology  or  interface religion.  The subject
for the following  column  is  undecided.   I  am  considering  mouse and
keyboard messages, VDI  drawing  primitives,  and  the  file  selector as
topics.  Let me know your preferences in the Feedback!
