Hi!

I have some questions for anyone to answer! :)

First, does your Phone-company (Provider) have something called Caller ID?
ie, you get some information sent to you along wiht the RING-signal, so that 
you can see (With the right equipment) who is calling (The number) BEFORE you 
answer the phone?

Second, Do you have an Modem that support Caller ID, ie an option in the modem 
that detects the caller-id information sent from the phone-company, and then 
sends this information to the computer, in one way or another?

If you answer YES to any of the above questions, take a look at these below 
also, the rest of you can skip this message (Unless you are really intrested)

How does your phone-company handle the user-part of the Caller id service?
Is it on constantly? or do you have to cal the company and ask them to put it 
on?
Do you have to pay to get this service? And How much does it cost?
is there any ways of cancelling this service when you have it on?

I would like an complete description (or as complete as you can) on how it all 
works with your company (not the tecnical, but the user-side like the above 
questions) and do not forget to mention the name of the phone-company.  :)

Now for some tecnical bits! (Example is Telia in Sweden)

How do they send the information?  Ex: DTMF tones
When do they send the information? Ex: Before the first RING-signal
How often do they send it?         Ex: Only once
What information is included?      Ex: Only the number
Anything more you want to include? Ex: Nope :)))))))

That was the phone-company bit, now lets start with the modem part.

Name of the modem would be good now! :)
How do you switch on/off the detecting of the Caller-id signals?
When does your modem send the information to the computer, and how many times?
What information does your modem send? (Descriptions please)
What is the Format of the information? (with the Intertex modems in sweden it 
looks like this: (with one setting)
DATE = 0000 (This does not work with the DTMF-system in Sweden)
TIME = 0000 (This does not work with the DTMF-system in Sweden)
NMBR = 08282828 (this ofcourse will change depending on the number the caller 
has)

Are there other formats the modem can use? then include them all.

Well, I guess thats it! :) I hope that you can answer this for me, so that I 
can (hopefully) finnish my project soon.

/Chris/ (*FireSTorm #Falcon# Center*)
      _Falcon 030 4/580 *32Mhz*_

