RUBE II:  Das Klickenklacker

Introduction:

RUBE II, like its predecessor, is an automaton-like system, where a set
of objects are governed by the predetermined laws of "physics."  Once
constructed, the RUBE program executes forever in time units known as
"frames," and there is no "current-" or "next instruction," in the
traditional programming sense.

Frames are not unlike frames in a movie, where each is a step in the
action.  Each frame is created from the last through the following a
simple process of determining the next location for objects, resolving
impending collisions between objects, and committing the resolved
movements.

The collision resolution is made up of two parts:  Precedence rules,
and recursive effects.  Precedence rules govern which objects and/or
directions are more important in a collision:  A higher-precedence
object involved in a collision will be allowed to progress, while any
other objects will be held in their previous locations.  A Recursive
Effect is just a fancy term stating that if the resolution of one
collision causes another potential collision, the new collision must
also be resolved, using the same precedence rules.

Objects and Collisions:

Objects fall into three major categories.  In order of their precedence,
they are Stationary Objects, Motive Objects, and Moveable Objects.

Stationary Objects are items that are immobile throughout the course of
the program.  As such, they have the highest precedence of all objects,
since they must always be in the same location.  They include structural
objects, and data manipulation objects.

Motive Objects are objects which can change the location of other
(Moveable) objects.  They automatically move in a preset direction and,
when a Moveable Object (see below) is encountered, "push" that object
at the same speed.  These include the so-called dozers.

Moveable Objects are data.  They can be pushed by Motive Objects, and
are frequently operated upon by Stationary Objects.  Note that, when
being pushed by a Motive Object, the recursive nature of RUBE implicitly
"promotes" the Moveable Object to a Motive Object, for purposes of
collision resolution.

Within each category of objects (except Stationary Objects, for obvious
reasons), there are two axes of motion along which the object might
move.  The precedence of axes are ordered such that vertical movement
is resolved before horizontal movement.  Diagonal movement, if possible,
is resolved after the "cardinal" movements have been resolved.

The only remaining precedence issues are along the same axis of motion--
so-called "head-to-head" collisions.  Within this case, there are two
subcases.  Each gives both objects the same precedence, but the
collision must be handled differently in each case.

First, the easy one:  If two already-adjacent objects are trying to
enter each other's locations, the resulting collision halts both
objects.

Alternatively, if two non-adjacent objects are trying to enter the same
location, the result is undefined.  One object or the other will be
treated as though it has a higher precedence for the purposes of the
single collision.

Finally, at the bottom of the precedence rules are Moveable Objects
which are "transferred" to a new location by a Stationary Object (see
the Conveyor Objects, Incline Objects, Winch Object, Swinch Objects, and
Gate Object).  In such a collision, the transfer is simply ignored.

Forces:

RUBE supports a single force, a pseudo-gravity which pulls all non-
Stationary Objects downward at a rate of one location per frame.  For
purposes of conflict resolution, one can consider each object to have
an implicit Motive Object above it, pushing downward.

That is, unless stopped, all objects (other than Stationary) will move
downward, one location every frame.

Stationary Objects:

As described before, Stationary Objects have the highest precedence, as
befits their use as "operation nodes" and/or structural features.  Among
them are:

Structural:  Structural Objects are Stationary Objects which do not
alter Crates (see Moveable Objects).  At most, they simply change the
location of a nearby Object.
        Object  Name            Special Features
          =     Girder          None
          /     Incline Right   Motive force up 1 to right, left 1 to
                                above
          \     Incline Left    Motive force up 1 to left, right 1 to
                                above
          >     Right Conveyor  Motive force right 1 to above
          <     Left Conveyor   Motive force left 1 to above
          W     Winch Up        Move below to above
	  M	Winch Down	Move above to below
          V     Swinch Up       Move below to above, change to A
          A     Swinch Down     Move above to below, change to V
          ,     Reflector       Reverse Dozers (see below) that pass below
Operational:  Operational Objects are Stationary Objects which, in
addition to being usable as Structural Objects Girder), also make
modification to nearby Moveable Objects.
        Object  Name            Special Features
          +     Packer          Adds left to right, sum below
          -     Unpacker        Subtracts right from left, result below
			NB:  Packers and Unpackers use Modular
			     arithmetic.  Only values 0-f result.
          :     Replicator      Copy above to below
          .     Replicate Up    Copy below to above
          K     Gate            Move above to left if less than below,
                                Move above to right if greater than
                                below
          F     Furnace         Destroy surrounding
Communications:  Communications Objects act entirely like Girders,
but also allow for communications with the outside world.
        Object  Name            Special Features
          I     Input           Creates input character nibbles below
          N     Output Number   Prints nibble above
          C     Output Char     Prints character represented by nibbles
                                above
It should be noted that a RUBE program may contain more than one Input
Object (I).  Should this happen, then input characters are delivered,
each to a different Input Object in succession, from left to right, then
top to bottom, like a scan line of a television.  When no more Input
Objects are available, the first one is used again.

Motive Objects:

As mentioned above, Motive Objects move under their own power, and have
a higher precedence than Moveable Objects, effectively pushing them to
where they are (presumably) needed.  At this time, there are only three
Motive Objects, plus the implicit Motive Object which handles gravity:
        Object  Name            Special Features
          (     Right Dozer     Moves Right
          )     Left Dozer      Moves Left
          ^     Rocket          Moves Up

Moveable Objects:

Moveable Objects, as described above, are the data of the RUBE program.
They can be moved by Motive Objects, and manipulated by Stationary
Objects.
        Object  Name            Special Features
         0..9   Crate           Values 0 through 9
         a..f   Crate           Values 10 through 15

