                                        Robert C. Arp, Jr.
                                        278-1 San Tomas Aquino Rd.
                                        Campbell, Ca 95008

                                        March 17, 1989


To all concerned:

Reference: Atari ST Machine Specific Programming In Assembly
           Chapter 2

     I am uploading chapter 2 as an ASCII file.  Figures 
referenced in the chapter are contained in BOOK2IMG.ARC  The 
figures that accompany the chapter are .IMG files.  These files 
can be viewed via the IMGSHOW.PRG available in IMGSHOW.ARC, file 
#9440 of this library.  The identification of each img file 
indicates its location of reference within the text.  For 
example, FIG2_2D.IMG is the figure specified at Figure 2.2D 
within the text.

     Using IMGSHOW.PRG to view the figures obviates ownership of 
1ST Word Plus in order to read the chapter.  Of course, since the 
chapter is being sent as an ASCII file, none of the special 
effect graphics can be seen.  Furthermore, IMGSHOW.PRG uses the 
entire screen to display the IMG files.  But, at least, you will 
be able to see the figures which are referenced.

     To set things up so that each figure can be viewed 
individually, place all of the IMG files and IMGSHOW.PRG in the 
same directory.  There are two ways in which the figures can be 
viewed.

     Method one:

     1. Click once on IMGSHOW.PRG.
     2. Click on Install Application under Desktop's Options 
        menu.  A dialog box will appear.
     3. Type IMG as the Document Type.
     4. Leave GEM as the Application Type.
     5. Click on the OK button.
     6. Click twice on the IMG file you want to view.
     7. When the figure appears on the screen you can obtain a 
        hard copy using the Alternate/Help key routine.
     8. To exit the IMGSHOW.PRG, press the Return key.

     Method two:

     1. Double click on IMGSHOW.PRG.  A dialog box will appear.
     2. For Show File Info: select Y.
     3. For White Background: select Y.
     4. For Wait For Keypress: select Y.
     5. For Cycle: select N.
     6. For Pause Time: leave it at <>.
     7. Click on the PROCEED button.
     8. As each figure appears on the screen, a data table will 
        also appear, next to it.  The most important information 
        shown in the data table is the name of the IMG file.  If 
        you use the Alternate/Help key routine to obtain a hard
        copy of each figure, the IMG file name in the data table
        will identify it for future use.
     9. After a figure appears, it will remain until the Return 
        key is pressed.
    10. The IMGSHOW.PRG will show each file once, in turn.
 

                               Sincerely,
                               Bob

