                         ROCKFALL - THE SPECIAL EDITION
                                  Version 1.51

                                By Jason Brasier


     INTRODUCTION

          Rockfall is a game based on  the  classics of Boulderdash and the
     Repton series.  The main aim of these  games (as if you didn't already
     know!) is to collect all of  the  diamonds  in each level before being
     allowed to proceed to the next.

          The player would also have to either dispose of or avoid the many
     hazards to be found.  The first of which, comes from the boulders that
     could kill you if they fall.  Monsters  and time limits also needed to
     be dealt with.

          In Rockfall, the aims  remain  virtually  the  same.   All of the
     diamonds still need to be collected,  and  various monsters have to be
     dispensed with.

          I am a great fan  of  these  games,  and was disappointed to find
     that there weren't many decent  conversions  to  be found on the Atari
     ST.  This was the reason for writing  my own version.  I hope that you
     like it.


     RUNNING ROCKFALL

          Starting Rockfall from the desktop is  very simple.  All you need
     to do is double-click on the  file  ROCKFALL.PRG.  After a short wait,
     the title screen should  be  displayed.   If  you  are returned to the
     desktop, then the program couldn't  find  the level file ROCKFALL.LEV.
     Make sure it's in the same folder.

          If you have several level  (.LEV)  files  on  disk.  You can have
     Rockfall load the desired set by  installing  it as an application and
     double-clicking on a level file.   Use Install Application... from the
     Options menu from GEM (or NeoDesk) and use LEV as the document type.

          You can do a similar thing from within a command line interpreter
     (CLI).  At the prompt, type:

                           rockfall <level filename>

          You must include the .LEV extension after the filename, otherwise
     Rockfall won't be able to find it.  For example:

                              rockfall newset.lev

          If you find all of this  confusing simply use the simplest method
     of double-clicking on  ROCKFALL.PRG.   You  can  load  new levels from
     within Rockfall, anyway.


     TITLE SCREEN OPTIONS

          When the program has loaded, you will be presented with the title
     screen.  There will be a  scroll-text  describing all of the available
     options, as well as telling you how to  play.  I will also go over the
     options here, which are:

          Fire Button    -    Start on last level played
          Space          -    Start on level 1
          Esc            -    Load new level set
          X              -    Return to desktop or CLI

          Pressing fire will allow you to  start  on  the level you came to
     grief on in your previous go.  This is  so you don't have to play from
     the beginning every time.  Space will start  a game on level 1, so you
     can go for that all-important high score if you want.  You will always
     start on level 1 when the game is first run.

          If you feel like attempting one of  the other sets of levels that
     may be stored on disk,  then  you  can  load  them by pressing Esc and
     entering the name of  the  file  at  the  prompt.   You  don't need to
     include the .LEV extension.  If the  file  is found, it will be loaded
     and the current high score reset.


     PLAYING INSTRUCTIONS

          Those of you who have  played  Boulderdash or Repton will already
     have a pretty good idea of how to play.  I'm going to tell you anyway,
     for the  benefit  of  those  who  don't.   There  may  be  some slight
     differences between the games.

          In Rockfall, you control  Spud.   It's  up  to  you  to guide him
     around each level in search  of  diamonds.   You must collect them all
     before being allowed to move onto the next level.  You must do this by
     solving the many  puzzles  while  avoiding  or  disposing  of the many
     hazards you will encounter.

          The first of Spud's  dangers  will  appear  in  the form of large
     boulders which wall  fall  whenever  they  aren't  supported.   If one
     happens to fall on him, it  will  mean  the  loss of one of his lives.
     They will also roll off  other  objects  which  don't  have a flat top
     surface, such as other boulders, diamonds, curved wall sections and so
     on.

          Not only do the boulders form the  basis of the many puzzles, but
     you must also learn how to solve the puzzles using them!  Spud is able
     to push a boulder either to the left or right, but not up or down.  He
     can only do this if nothing is  blocking  the path of the boulder (and
     that includes other boulders - only one  can be pushed at a time).  To
     push a boulder, simply move  into  it  from the appropriate direction.
     In other words, move into it from the  right if you want to push it to
     the left.  Always be careful when  moving boulders, as you could block
     your route and be unable to finish.

          Not all of the diamonds may  be  visible  at first.  Some of them
     are likely to be hidden inside  safes.   In order to collect them, you
     must first collect a key to open  the safes.  Once done, every safe in
     the level will reveal the diamond inside.  Extra keys can be picked up
     for a bonus.

          No game  would  be  complete  without  one  or  two  nasties, and
     Rockfall is no  exception.   Poor  old  Spud  will  have  to deal with
     Monsters and Pulsators on most of the levels.  Each is dealt with in a
     different way, which is described below.

          You will know when  you  have  Monsters  to  contend with, as the
     presence of large yellow eggs will  tell you.  You can't harm Monsters
     while they're still inside, so it's up to you to force them out.  This
     is done by pushing them (in the  same manner as boulders) so that they
     fall and break.  After  a  short  pause,  the  Monster will emerge and
     start its rampage around the level.   Killing  them is simply a matter
     of pushing a boulder onto them.  Contact with them is deadly, so don't
     think that you  can  make  friends  with  them  simply because they're
     smiling, because in actual fact, they're laughing!

          Pulsators, on the other hand, are  alive  and well the moment you
     enter a level.  They are strange creatures which find their way around
     by 'feeling' for the wall (or other  object) to their left and keep to
     it.  Each of these Pulsators  carries  a  diamond, which you must also
     collect in order to finish the level.   To make them drop the diamonds
     they carry, you must construct a  route  through  the level to each of
     the traps.  You can do  this  by  leaving  or  moving objects in their
     path.  Once they enter a trap, they will turn into a diamond, enabling
     you to pick it up.  Pulsators  are  also unhealthy to any unsuspecting
     Spud!

     WARNING:  Don't try and kill a Pulsator by dropping a boulder onto it,
               as this could have the  effect  of confusing it.  This means
               that the Pulsator could start to  travel in a small circle -
               stopping it from reaching a trap.  You can do the same thing
               by altering their immediate  surroundings.   For example, by
               collecting diamonds from around them.

          Once you have managed to collect  all  of the diamonds and killed
     all of the Monsters, the exit  should  open.  Simply guide Spud to the
     exit and you will have successfully completed the level.

          There's just one  thing  I  haven't  mentioned  yet  ... the time
     limit!  You will have 3  minutes  (180  seconds) to complete the first
     level.  After  completing  a  level,  an  additional  2  minutes  (120
     seconds) is added to whatever you  have  left from the previous level.
     If you run out of time, the game will be over!

          After each level you will be given  a bonus which is equal to the
     amount of time you have left.

          You control Spud using the joystick.   The fire button is used to
     commit suicide.   This  is  used  when  you're  stupid  enough  to get
     yourself trapped.  You will lose a life, but it may get you out of the
     sticky situation by placing you  back  at  the starting position.  You
     can press Q to abandon a game completely.


     USING THE LEVEL EDITOR

          I have also provided the GFA Basic level editor.  It is stored on
     the disk in ASCII (.LST)  format.   This  will  enable it to be loaded
     into versions 2 or 3.  I  would  have provided a runnable PRG version,
     but I don't have the  necessary  compiler.   I would like to apologise
     for the program's lack of user-friendliness, as it was originally only
     meant for my own use.

          To use the level editor, make sure  you are in low resolution and
     run GFA Basic in the  normal  way.    You  will  need to use the Merge
     option from the menu to load the  editor.  The program also expects to
     find the file SPRITES.PI1 in the same folder.


     The Main Menu

          When run (by pressing Shift+F10), you  will be presented with the
     main menu with  several  options  available.   This  will be described
     below:


     Load Level Set:

          This option provides two functions.  The  first  is to load a set
     from disk, and the other is to name the set being edited.

          When selected, you will  be  presented  with  the normal GEM file
     selector.  To load a new set  from  disk, simply select the file using
     the mouse.  The file will then load.

          If you enter a name at the  keyboard, and the file doesn't exist,
     then the file currently being  edited  will  be  named to whatever you
     entered,  but  with  a  .LEV   extension.   The  default  filename  is
     ROCKFALL.LEV and should be changed when  creating a new set, otherwise
     you will overwrite the default set of levels.


     Create Level:

          Use this option to add a new  level to the current set.  There is
     a maximum of 48 levels.  Before  selecting  this option, make sure you
     want to add a new level, as there is no way of deleting it afterwards.


     Edit Level:

          The altering of levels is  achieved  with  this option.  You will
     need to enter the number of the level you wish to edit.  Note that the
     numbering starts from 0, instead of 1 as in the game.


     Sort Levels:

          Each level is given a difficulty  factor  between 0 and 99.  This
     determines how easy a level is  to complete.  This option simply sorts
     the entire level set into the correct order.

     WARNING:  The sorting process is carried out  on the disk.  This means
               that it saves the file to disk,  but sorts the levels at the
               same time.   Therefore,  make  sure  you  have  the  correct
               filename for the file (use Load to set it).  The sorted file
               is automatically loaded afterwards.


     Save Level Set:

          This option simply saves the level  set to disk.  It doesn't sort
     them, just saves them as they are  in  memory.  Make sure you have the
     correct filename set.  A warning  will  be  given  if the file already
     exists.

          Whenever the file is saved to  disk,  two files are created.  The
     first is with a  .LEV  extension.   This  is  the  level data which is
     loaded by Rockfall.  The second  file,  with  a .DIF extension, stores
     the difficulty factors  for  the  level  set.   This  isn't  needed by
     Rockfall, only the editor.


     Quit:

          Do I really need to explain this one?   All I need to say is that
     it won't take you back to the GFA  Basic editor, but return you to the
     desktop.


     Editing A Level

          When you select Create  or  Edit  from  the  main  menu, you will
     either be presented with a new  empty  level  or  the map of the level
     selected.  In the top left corner of  the  screen is the number of the
     level being editor.   The  top  right  corner  shows  the  name of the
     current sprite (map block).

          Placing the current sprite in  the  level  is  simply a matter of
     pointing at the desired location with  the mouse and pressing the left
     mouse button.

          To choose a different sprite,  press  the  right mouse button.  A
     sprite selection screen will appear.  Point  at the sprite you wish to
     use and press the left mouse button.   You can cancel this screen with
     the right mouse button.

          When you have finished  editing  the  level  press Q.  The editor
     will then check that there  aren't  any  errors  in the design.  These
     include things like:

          -    No key when there are safes present
          -    No starting position or exit
          -    No boulders when there are eggs present

          The program will display any  errors  which it has detected.  You
     will have to re-edit the level until  it passes the validation.  If it
     does  pass,  it  doesn't  necessarily  mean  that  the  level  can  be
     completed.  You may play-test it (see below).

          You will then be  asked  for  the  difficulty  factor.  This is a
     number between 0 and 99 which is  used in the sort option to determine
     which levels are easy and which are hard.  The higher this number, the
     harder the level.  The previous factor  may be displayed.  If you want
     to change it, press Backspace  until  it  has  gone  and enter the new
     value.  Press Return when you have entered the number.


     Play-Testing

          Provision for a play-test has  been incorporated in Rockfall.  To
     use it, first design your level with the editor.  Afterwards, save the
     file to disk (don't sort it).  Load Rockfall as normal.  Press Esc and
     enter the name of your file.  On the title screen type TOTHEEND.  This
     will take you  to  the  last  level  in  the  set  (the  one  you just
     designed).  You will be given 1,000  seconds  to test the level.  This
     was originally a cheat, but  I  have  revealed  it  for the purpose of
     testing.


     CREDITS

          Rockfall is an SOS Software  production.  All programming, graph-
     ics and sound by  Jason  Brasier.   Levels  designed by Jason Brasier,
     Philip Brown and James  Brown.   Rockfall  was  created  on a 520 STFM
     using the Devpac 2 assembler from HiSoft.
