Congratulations on obtaining the STOS Cyber extension version 1.00


This extension has been created by Andy Cato and Martin Cubitt. The
compiler extension was fixed by Les Greenhalgh to whom I am very
grateful.

The extension only has two commands:

        cyber

          &

        view cyber 'sequence address', 'flag', 'temporary bank address'


The first command, cyber, simply lists information about using the 
cyber extension. If you do not have this document to hand or want a
quick reminder of the view cyber command you can simply type 'cyber' 
from the STOS interpreter. 

The second command is the one which does all the work. This will view a
cyber sequence and depending on the way you set the flag will either loop
or just go through the sequence once. In any case you can press the 
spacebar to exit the sequence once going. 

The first parameter is the address of the bank holding the cyber sequence
and must be such a sequence or the command will crash. As usual with STOS
extensions the address must be the real address (eg start(5)) not a bank
number.

The second parameter is a flag which may be 0 or 1. A zero will not loop 
the sequence but will exit the command upon completion of one cycle of 
animation (or spacebar being pressed). A one will loop continually until
the spacebar is pressed. This is particularly useful for demonstrations
which you wish to keep running as a display or something.

The third and final parameter is an address of a bank which must be set
up by the programmer. This bank must be a 65k bank which is empty. It is
used internally by the extension. This keeps the size of the extension
down to a minimum size. 


There are two example STOS source programs on this disc for use with the
Cyber extension. Note that some of the packed SEQuences require at least 
one megabyte to work.


The Cyber demonstration sequences on this disc are available in the public
domain and are not my work! Search through any decent PD library for more 
cyber sequences you may be able to use in your STOS programs. I can
particularly recommend POWER PD, Floppyshop and Goodmans. POWER PD seem to
offer the best deal around.


Document author: Martin Cubitt
