MIDI SAMPLE DUMP STANDARD

1) INTRODUCTION

   The MIDI SDS was adopted in January 1986  by  the  MIDI Manufacturers
Association and the Japanese MIDI Standards Committee. The SDS defines the
standard method for transfer of sound sample data between MIDI-equipped
devices. Sample dumps may be accomplished with either an 'open loop' or
'closed loop' system. The open loop method simply involves the straight dump
of all sample data from its source to the destination, with no timeouts,
packet acknowledgements, or any other form of handshaking, much as in the
manner of a sysex bulk dump, usually intiated at the source.
	The closed loop method allows the use of handshaking messages
between the dump source and destination, and usually places the dump process
under the control of the slave, to allow it time to process the incoming
data as necessary. As with any standard, it can not be assumed that a device
adheres to it unless the accompanying documentation specifically indicates
it. Even then, it is best to check its conformity with non-critical data.

2) SPEC: SAMPLE DUMP FORMATS

   DUMP HEADER:

F0 7E cc 01 ss ss ee ff ff ff gg gg gg hh hh hh ii ii ii jj F7

where

cc       =   channel number
ss ss    =   sample number (LSB first)
ee       =   sample format (number of significant bits; 8->28)
ff ff ff =   sample period (1/sample rate) in nanoseconds (LSB first)
gg gg gg =   sample length, in words
hh hh hh =   sustain loop start point (word number) (LSB first)
ii ii ii =   sustain loop end point (word number) (LSB first)
jj       =   loop type (00:forwards only; 01:alternating)

   DATA PACKET:

F0 7E cc 02 kk <120 bytes> mm F7

where

cc    =   channel number
kk    =   running packet count (00->7F)
mm    =   checksum (XOR of 7E, cc, 02, kk <120 bytes>)

   The total size of a data packet is 127 bytes. This is to avoid overflow
of the MIDI input buffer of a device that may want to receive an entire
packet before processing it.
   A data packet consists of its own header, a packet number, 120 bytes of
data, a checksum, and an EOX. The packet number begins at 00 and increments
with each new packet. It resets to 00 after it reaches 7F, and continues
counting. The packet number is used by the receiver to distinguish between a
new data packet, or a resend of a previous packet. The packet number is
followed by 120 bytes of data, which form 60, 40, or 30 words (MSB first for
multiword samples), depending on the length of a single data sample.

   Each data byte hold seven bits, with the msb in each byte set to 0, in
order to conform to the requirements of MIDI data transmission. Information
is left justified within the 7-bit bytes, and unused bits are filled with 0.
   Example: Assume a data point in the memory of a 16-bit sampler,
with the value 87E5. In binary, that would be

             1000 0111 1110 0101

and would be encoded as the following MIDI data stream:

           01000011 01111001 00100000

   The checksum is the running XOR of all the data after the SYSEX byte, up
to but not including the checksum itself.

3) SPEC: SAMPLE DUMP MESSAGES

   DUMP REQUEST:

F0 7E cc 03 ss ss F7

where

cc    =   channel number
ss ss  =   sample number requested (LSB first)

   Upon receiving the request, the sampler checks the sample number to see
if it is within legal range. If it is not, the request is ignored. If it is,
the sample dump is started. One packet at a time is sent, under control of
the handshaking messages outlined below.

   HANDSHAKING MESSAGES:

   For all below:

cc    =   channel number
pp    =   packet number

   Packet numbers are included in the handshaking messages to accomodate
machines that have the intelligence to re-transmit specific packets after an
entire dump is finished, or if synchronization is lost.

   ACK :   F0 7E cc 7F pp F7

   Means last packet was recieved correctly (checksum OK, etc),
please send next one. Packet number is packet being acknowledged as
correct.

   NAK :   F0 7E cc 7E pp F7

   Means last packet not received correctly, please send again.
Packet number is packet being rejected.

   CANCEL : F0 7E cc 7D pp F7

   Means abort dump immediately. Packet number is packet on which
abort occurs.

   WAIT  : F0 7E cc 7C pp F7

   Means pause dump indefinitely, until next message is sent. Allows the
unit recieving the dump to perform other functions (disk access, etc),
before receiving the remainder of the dump. The next message it sends (eg
ACK, ABORT) will determine if the dump continues or aborts.

4) DUMP PROCEDURE: MASTER (DUMP SOURCE)

   Once a dump has been requested, either via MIDI or through the front
panel, the DUMP HEADER is sent. After sending the header, the master must
time out for at least two seconds, to allow the receiver to decide if it
will accept this sample (has enough memory, etc).

   If it receives a CANCEL, within this time, it should abort immediately.
If it receives an CAK, it will start sending packets immediately. If it
receives a WAIT, it pauses until another message is received, and then
processes that mesage normally. If nothing is recieved within the timeout,
an open loop is assumed, and the dump starts with the first packet.

   After sending each packet, the master should time out for at least 20
milliseconds and watch its MIDI In. If an ACK is received, it sends the next
packet immediately. If it receives an NAK, and the packet number matches the
number of the last packet sent, it resend that packet If the packet numbers
don't match, and the device is incapable of sending packets out of order,
the NAK will be ignored.
   If a WAIT is received, the master should watch its MIDI In port
indefinitely for another ACK, NAK, or CANCEL message, which it should then
process normally.

   If no messages are received within 20 milliseconds of the transmission of
a packet, the master may assume an open loop configuration, and send the
next packet.
   This process continues until there are less than 121 data bytes to send.
The final packet will still consist of 120n bytes, regardless of how many
significant bytes actually remain, and the unused bytes will be filled with
zeroes. The receiver should handshake after receiving the last packet.

5) DUMP PROCEDURE: SLAVE (DUMP DESTINATION)

   When receiving a sample dump, a device should keep a running checksum
during reception. If its checksum matches the checksum in the data packet,
it will send an ACK and wait for the next packet. If it does not match, it
will send an NAK containing the number of the packet that caused the error,
and wait for the next packet. If, after sending an NAK, the packet number of
the next packet doesn't match the previous packet number (the one that was
NAK'd), and the unit is not capable of accepting packets out of order, the
error is ignored and the dump continues as if the checksums had matched.
   If a receiver runs out of memory before the dumpo is completed,
it should send a CANCEL to stop the dump.

6) SDS OVERVIEW

   SAMPLE DUMP DATA FORMAT: DUMP HEADER:

   Sysex
     ID: Universal Non-Real Time
     Channel Number
     Sub ID: Header
     Sample Number (2 bytes, LSB first)
     Sample Format
     Sample Period (3 bytes, LSB first)
     Sample Length (3 bytes, LSB first)
     Sustain Loop Start Point (3 bytes, LSB first)
     Sustain Loop End Point (3 bytes, LSB first)
     Loop Type
   Eox

   SAMPLE DUMP DATA FORMAT: DATA PACKET:

   Sysex
     ID: Universal Non-Real Time
     Channel Number
     Sub ID: Data Packet
     Packet Number
     Sample Data (120 bytes)
     Checksum
   Eox

   SAMPLE DUMP MESSAGES: DUMP REQUEST:

   Sysex
     ID: Universal Non-Real Time
     Channel Number
     Sub ID: Dump Request
     Sample Number (2 bytes, LSB first)
   Eox

   SAMPLE DUMP MESSAGES: HANDSHAKING FLAGS:

   Sysex
     ID: Universal Non-Real Time
     Channel Number
     Sub ID: ACK or NAK or CANCEL or WAIT
     Packet Number
   Eox
