Description:
Fully featured Auto Folder programme to set or adjust the internal clock.

Instructions for use:
Place Date2000.prg in the Auto folder of  your boot disk / drive. It  does
not have to appear in any particular position in the Auto folder. You  can
also run the programme from the Desktop whenever you like.

Background information:
My STe is one of the 60%  of the machines owned by Atari Computing  readers
that do not  have a built  in battery backed  clock. Like over  half of  my
fellow enthusiasts I  have a hard  disk, and I  need to have  all my  files
saved with the correct time and date stamp. So when I found that my current
clock setting utility was not millennium compliant, I trawled the net for a
replacement. I found many examples, each  of which had some good  features,
but none fitted the bill perfectly. Clutching my manuals for HiSoft Basic 2
I set about writing the perfect Clock Setting Utility.

I soon found  that the actual  clock setting code  was fairly simple,  and
could be written in a few minutes. However, the key to a good utility is a
good interface. Thus began many evenings of experiments.

My shopping list of requirements was that it must -
   -  run from the Auto folder (i.e. no GEM),
   -  set the clock by any combination of number or arrow keys,
   -  continuously display the day of the week, the date and the time 
      (including the seconds if the clock is running) during date setting,
   -  have no date limitations, beyond the fundamental limits of the Atari  
      operating system.,
   -  have full error and calendar checking,
   -  know whether  the clock  has already  been  set and  time out  if  a
      running clock is not adjusted,
   -  remember the last time the clock was set,
   -  not require any additional files to run.

You may wish to add to the  list, for example by making it go  "tick-tock".
Perhaps English is not your first language  or may want to change the  date
display order. So I have included the full source listing. It is  annotated
with some of the interesting things I found out as I struggled to get it to
work, including  a function  for the  Zeller Congruence.  This is  used  to
calculate the day of the week. I  found it in an obscure Pascal listing  on
the net; wonderful thing those web search engines!

By the way, the utility is good for any date up to 31st December, 2107  by
which time I would be 154 years old. So it should see us all out!

Usual disclaimer:
As ever, there is no warranty and the  like. It has only been tested on  my
STe, which has the  excellent TUS Veloce+ board  fitted. How it behaves  on
your machine is your responsibility. It is free after all.                


Have fun! 

Michael High

3 Kenilworth Drive, 
LISBURN, 
Co. Antrim,
BT28 3UQ

Email: high@nortelnetworks.com
