WHAT IS CORESONG?
-----------------
Coresong is New Core's own fileformat for digital music.
There is no editor for Coresongs, but you can easily convert an 4 or
8-voice Octalyser module to the Coresong format by using the program
called MOD_SNG.PRG. The reason that we made our own fileformat is that
we didn't found modules to be so well suited for our needs. First of all
we wanted the samples to be separated from the songfile, wich would
make it possible to use the same samples for many songs in the same
program and that way save a lot of memory in our own demos and games.
Because of this a "Coresong-module" consists of two parts, the songdata
and the voiceset. The songdata is put in a small file with the extension
"SNG" (SoNG) and the samples are put in a file with the extension "SBK"
(SampleBanK). Coresong is also optimized a lot and some changes has been
made to make it more apropriate for the STE. Since the songdata in an
SNG-file is organized in a more intelligent way than in a module it takes
less memory than the songdata in a module. On the other hand the sample-
loops and endings are prepared for simpel and fast STE-replay in the
voiceset, making every sample take about 1 kb more memory when it is put
in a Coresong-voiceset. Coders that have written their own replayroutines
will know what I'm talking about.   

HOW DO I CONVERT A MODULE TO CORESONG?
--------------------------------------
You simply use our little program named "MOD_SNG.PRG", but first you have
to make sure that the module you want to convert is in Octalyser 4 or 8
voice format. The 6 voice format is not supported, sorry! To make sure a
module is in the correct format, just load it into the Octalyser and save
it again. A 6 voice module has to be saved as an 8 voice module.
When MOD_SNG is loaded a fileselector will appear, now simply select the
module you want to convert. After a few seconds (or a fraction of a second
if the module is small or/and you have a Falcon) the fileselector will
appear again. Now enter the name of the songfile you want to save. After
saving the songfile the fileselector will appear a third time. Now enter
the name of the voiceset you want to save. If you don't want to save the
voiceset you can click cancel, After this the fileselector appears again
asking you for another module to convert. If you don't want to convert
another module you should select cancel, which will exit the program.
If any error occure the program just quits back to the desktop. Please
make sure that the destination disk isn't writeprotected and has enough of
space for the converted files. I also recommend you to do the conversion
on a machine with at least 1 Mb memory. 

