TextZap.  A educational demo on writing text directly to the screen.
-------
by Craig Harvey    1/17/90

In the interest of everyone having fast text output...

This is just a little piece of programming I got into a few days ago
(many long hours ago!) to see if I could do some of the tricks done
in programs like QuickST and TurboST to speed up text output to the
screen.  The end purpose of this will hopefully be to use it in my
DIARY program, now that I've proven to myself I can make it work.

Please don't be scared off by the .MOD extender on the source file.
All the important commands are given in assembly and machine code
as well as the Modula-2, and I've tried to comment it all fairly well.

I thank Darek Mihocka for uploading the source to an early monochrome
version of QuickST to GEnie for people to learn from.  From that I got
the basic idea of how to copy data from the system fonts to the screen,
but I was amazed how many more details I needed to fill in when it came
to actually getting it to work (my assembly language experience is
rather limited).  And then I was silly enough to think it was done when
I got it working in mono.  Hah!  And then I was silly enough again to
think that low res would be a piece of cake after getting medium res. 
Hah!!  Of course, as soon as I got it, it all made perfect (mostly) sense
and I couldn't believe it had taken as long as it had.

I have no doubt that further optimizations are possible.  I know that in
mono and medium resolution both TurboST and QuickST are still somewhat
faster than this.  In low res TurboST is faster, but QuickST is slower.
You can see this for yourself by looking at the first part of the demo
(the BIOS bconout test) with either of those programs loaded, and compare
that speed to the second part of the demo which is TextZap (which isn't
affected by those programs).

Also included is some code to draw a cursor and position the cursor
without relying on VT-52 codes or VDI functions.  I expect to need these
when I go to actually use this text output routine in my program.  As a
side benefit, this should get rid of the incompatibilities DIARY has
always had with QuickST, and also with stealing the cursor position
from the Flash on-line window when using DIARY from within Flash.

GEnie:  c.harvey
Compuserve:  73047,600
