
Madam Librarian

by David Plotkin

I program my ST.  This should be no surprise to all of you.  What you
probably don't know is that I learn a lot from the work of others,
primarily from reading the excellent range of magazines which support
the ST.  But even in the short span of time that the ST has been out,
a large number of articles have been published.  These include
how-to's of programming, tutorials, reviews and general commentary.
The problem was how to find a particular article I remembered reading?
Enter Madam Librarian.

Madam Librarian is a database designed for cataloging magazine
articles.  You may enter the following data about each article: title,
author, magazine, issue, page, type, language and a four-line
description.  Most of these items are self-explanatory.  Type refers
to a general category like review, game, article, etc.  Each item of
data (title, author, etc.) is called a field, and each group of fields
which describes all the information about one article is called a
record.   Once a record has been entered, you can change it at any
time, print it out in two formats and search for any string.  As a
bonus, it even comes with a complete database of ST magazine articles
for START, Antic, ST Log, Analog and Compute's Atari ST magazine.

Here's How It Works

The File menu contains three items, Load, Save and Quit.  Load and
Save bring up a file selector box so that you can load and save your
work.  Be sure to save your work periodically or you may lose it.
Quit dumps you back to the Desktop, after confirming that you really
want to do that.  You must have saved your work or you will lose it.
You may also quit the program by clicking on the close box in the
upper left corner of the window.

The next menu is the Options menu.  The first two items are Regular
and Summary.  Clicking on one of these items chooses the format for a
printout.  Regular format prints each record pretty much as it appears
on the screen, except that if the Description lines are not used, then
they are not printed.  Summary format prints a one-line summary of the
record, including the title, magazine and issue.  This is generally
all you need to find what you are looking for.

Next are the items Titles and Condensed.  Choosing either of these
items will cause a checkmark to appear next to it, indicating that
the item is selected.  Clicking next to a selected (checked) items
deselects it, removing the checkmark.  Titles will cause a printout
in Regular (see above) format to have the field name printed next to
each piece of data.  For example, instead of just printing out the
title of an article, you would get the word "Article:" and then the
actual title.  Condensed will provide output in condensed (17 cpi) if
it is selected, or normal (10 cpi) if it is not.  This only works for
Epson compatible printers.

The next three items are the printer selections.  First is Print
Options.  Choosing this item brings up a dialog box.  Click on the up
and down arrows alongside each option to change that option.  The new
value of each option is reflected in the box.  The first selection is
for blank lines.  This sets the number of lines to be printed in
between records.  You can set this where you like for the Regular
format printout, it is ignored if you choose Summary format.  The next
selection is for blank spaces, which sets the number of spaces which
will be printed as a left margin for each line.  This applies to both
formats of printout.  The final selection is for margins.  The number
shown for this option is divided in half, and the result is used for
the top and bottom margins on the page.  Note that clicking on the
arrows for the margins changes the amount shown by 2.

Print All prints out all the records in the database in the selected
format.  The program will not break records across a page break in
Regular format.

Print Some brings up a dialog box for entering a "search string."
Enter the string you want to search for and press [Return] or click on
Ok.  The program will search through the selected field (more on this
in a moment) for the first occurance of the search string.  It will
print out the record containing this string in the chosen format, then
proceed to the next matching record and print it out, continuing until
there are no more matches.  The selected field mentioned above refers
to the fields of the database.  Under the Match menu you will find a
list of the fields in the database.  One field will have a checkmark
next to it.  Click next to any field to make that one the selected
field.  Whenever you enter information in the search dialog, the
selected field of each record will be searched for a match.  In this
way, you can get a subset of your records for one magazine, or one
author, or even all the records whose titles include "ST".  Only the
first line of the four-line description is searched, so put your most
important information there.  Notice also that there is a box marked
Not in the dialog box.  You may click in this box, and the program
will search for all strings in the matching field which DO NOT contain
the string specified.  This is very helpful if you would, for example,
like to find all records which are not reviews.

Insert allows you to add a new record to your database.  You may
either select Insert from the menu or press [Control]-[I] to bring up
the dialog box for data.  Enter your data, moving from field to field
using the up and down arrows.  You can also advance foward using the
[Tab] key.  You can clear what is on the line by pressing the [Esc]
key.  The four-line description will not automatically word-wrap or
continue on the next line.  Instead, you will have to finish a word on
the line, then move down to the next line using the arrow keys.  When
you are done entering your data, click on Ok or press [Return].  You
may also click on Print to print your record in the currently
selected format or Cancel to forget the newly entered data.  After
each new record is entered, it will be put in the proper order by
sorting it alphabetically by the title, and the title you gave will
appear in the main window on the screen.  To view any record in the
window, just point to it with the mouse and click.  The record will
appear in a dialog box on the screen.  You may edit any part of the
record and press [Return] or click on Ok to enter the changes.
Clicking on Cancel will leave the record as it was.  You may also
print the record or click on Next to advance to the next record on the
screen.  If there is no next record, then you will be returned to the
main window.  Selecting Previous will bring up the previous record in
the database.  If there is no previous record, you will be returned to
the main window.  Clicking on Delete will remove the record from the
database altogether after first confirming that you really want to do
this.  If a record you want to view is not visible on the screen, you
can use the vertical scroll bar or arrows to move up and down through
the records.  If you change the Title field (the field the record is
sorted on), the record may be out of order, because the records are
not resorted until you save the file.  So if you have changed a lot of
titles (I don't know why you would!) and have a lot of records out of
order, just save and reload the file -- they will be in the right
order once again.

View/Chg/Del brings up a dialog box for entering the "search string."
Enter a string and press [Return] or click on Ok.  Again, you may
click on the Not box to search for all strings which do not contain
the specified string.  The program will search through the selected
field of each record for the first occurance of the string you chose,
and bring up that record on the screen in a dialog box.  You may
choose any of the buttons mentioned above, but now Next will find the
next occurance of the selected string, rather than just move to the
next record.  Previous will bring up the previous occurence of that
string, rather than just the previous record.  You may also modify any
of the data in the dialog box.  You may select this item by pressing
[Control]-[V] as well.

Reset line cnt is used when printing.  The program keeps track of the
line number it is printing on, and will automatically skip
perforations on the page, leaving a bottom and top margin as set using
Print Options.  However, if you use the form feed button on your
printer to advance to the top of the next page, the count will be off,
and the program will likely skip perforations where there aren't any,
and print over the real perforations.  Selecting this item will reset
the line counter to 1, so that you can maintain alignment when you
eject a page.

With Madam Librarian, you won't have to plow through stacks of
magazine issues to find just the article you need.  I hope you
find this program as useful as I do.  Watch START for future
updates of the index file as the wealth of ST material available
in magazines continues to grow.
