
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

                         PACKING ALGORITHMS
                         by Axe of Superior

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

‚ Axe of Superior (previously known as Axe of Delight) is a German
hacker  that  has  gained  quite a lot of  respect  and  fame  by
creating what it assumed to be the best packer on the ST -  "Pack
Ice".  In  this  issue,  we are proud to offer you  an  EXCLUSIVE
article he wrote about packing techniques - as well as the latest
version  of  the  packer,  which you will find  in  the  PROGRAMS
folder.   Be  warned,   dear  reader,   that  some  knowledge  of
programming is required to understand this article!

€ Hello everybody.  Well,  here is an article that should interest
you  if  you want to save some disk space.  In  fact,  it  should
interest  everybody  who does some programming or  other  serious
work with a computer.
 I  am sure you have all been confronted with packers,  that  can
often by recognised by a color flashing with random colors in the
background  color  of the screen.  Depending on the size  of  the
program and the speed of the packer, the flashing lasts longer or
shorter.

 I was not the first programmer who coded a packer on the ST, but
I have always been interested in compressing data.  When I had my
Apple  Computer,  I  was always angry that keeping  screen  shots
takes so much memory,  even if there is not much on the  screens.
Every  picture took 8192 bytes (I think) no matter if the  screen
was  empty  or  filled with nice  graphics.  For  that  reason  I
programmed my first packer ever - a picture compressor.  I  first
wrote  the  program in Basic and then the  unpacking  routine  in
Assembler. Unpacking time took one second, which is very fast for
an 8-Bit machine.
 On the ST,  there was need to pack more than just pictures.  All
data blocks and programs were bigger and needed to be packed.  In
search for a good packer, I tried several packing algorithms:

ˆRun Length Decoding
€
 It is always easy to program a packer that packs repeating bytes
and sets one command byte if the following bytes are packed,  but
this  way was not very effective.  I will now explain it  anyway,
because it is very easy.  Suppose you have the following bytes to
pack:

 -->  06, f0, 46, 46, 46, 46, 46, 46, 46, 46, 46, ef, 34.

 You can define one byte as command byte (say ff) after which you
indicate the byte and amount to be repeated.  This would give you
the following:

 -->  06, f0, ff, 46, 09, ef, 34.

 You have packed 13 bytes to 7 bytes which is about 50%.  This is
a  good  packing  rate,  but most times,  you  will  not  have  9
repeating bytes in a sequence in Assembler or C code. Well, it is
good  for packing blank data areas or screens with big  areas  of
one color.
 By  the way,  it will be more effective if you select a  command
byte that appears least often in your programming code. So, first
count all bytes and define the command byte as first byte in your
packed  data.   This  Packing  Algorithm  is  called  Run  Length
Encoding.

ˆBytekiller
€
 Don't  get  too enthusiasic with a packing rate of  50%  in  the
upper example.  The bytes were specially selected.  Just  imagine
you have a data block with a repeating pattern. For example:

Assembler code:     moveq     #0,d0
                    nop
                    nop
                    nop
                    nop
                    nop
                    nop
                    bra.s     test

 If you assemble this, you will get the following bytes:

 -->  70 00 4e 71 4e 71 4e 71 4e 71 4e 71 4e 71 60 08

 Using  the  upper routine,  you will not be able to  reduce  the
length  of the program by a single byte.  You need a new  routine
that  looks for repeating bytes and sets an information  for  the
unpacker, like the following:

 -->  70 00 4e 71  60 08

 This would exactly look like the following:

Packed data:                  Unpacked data:
Write: 70 00  4e 71           > 70 00  4e 71
Copy the string with the length
of 2 bytes from position 2 to the
current position.             7000  4e71   > 4e 71
Copy string: length 4 from pos.
2 to current pointer.         7000  4e714e71   > 4e 71 4e 71
Copy string: length 4 from pos.
2 to current pointer          7000  4e714e71  4e714e71 > 4e714e71
Write: 60 08                  70004e714e714e714e714e714e71 > 6008

 That  means:  You kept 6 bytes of data in your packed block  and
you  need 3 informations to copy bytes from another  position  to
the current.  If you consider that the informations to copy bytes
don't need to be bytes themselves,  but can also be bits, you can
save some memory.  Are you wondering how to mix bits with  bytes?
No  problem.  There  are 2 ways.  The first one is  used  in  the
"Bytekiller"  (also  known  as  "Jek-packer"   -  which  was  not
programmed but converted from Amiga to ST by Sharaz Jek.  By  the
way, "Bytekiller" is „still€ one of the most often used packers).
 You  rip  every byte apart to 8 bits and combine them  with  the
bits for the packing information.  Those bits are together put in
the packed memory as bytes.
 The  other - 40% faster - method is used in "Pack-Ice" and  most
of  the good packers.  The idea is to combine unpacked bytes  and
information bytes,  that consist of bits.  The unpacking  routine
will know when there is an information byte and when there is  an
unpacked byte.

 Now  I will tell you in detail what these information bits  look
like and what they do in the example of "Pack-Ice".

 When data can not be packed,  that means there are no  repeating
byte patterns,  it must be copied to the packed data directly, so
it  can be copied back to unpacked data when unpacking.  This  is
the only way to keep all data. So you put those un-packable bytes
in the packed data,  followed by an information about the  length
in the upper mentioned format.

 Let's say you have the following bytes:

 d3 a7 7b 3a 44 69 79 b0   Those bytes can not be packed, so they
                           can also be found in the packed data,
                           followed by the length information (8)
                           in bits (see below).

 The number of bytes is indicated by the following bits.

 Number of bytes:    0    Information Bits:   %0
                     1                        %10
                     2                        %1100
                     3                        %1101
                     4                        %1110
                     5                        %111100
                     6                        %111101
                     7                        %111110
                     8                        %111111000
                     9                        %111111001
                     10                       %111111010
                     .....                    .....

 As you can see,  the smallest length (0) needs just one bit. The
reason is that this length appears most often. In fact it appears
every  time when packed data follows and not unpacked bytes  that
just  have to be copied.  So there „is €a good reason why the  bits
look so strange and do not all have the same length.

 If data can be packed, then you need the %0 from the upper table
for  no unpacked bytes to switch to packed bytes and  after  that
follows  the  information  for the  packed  data,  which  is  the
following:

 Copy  data with  from  to the current  position.
For  length and object you use a similar table as the  one  shown
above.  When  you have read the two values,  you simply copy  the
needed bytes.

 Example: 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0a 0b <> 0c 0d 0e

 Note that in "Pack-Ice" and nearly all other packers the  offset
is not counted from the beginning of the file,  but it is counted
backwards  from  the  current position,  so  you  will  copy  the
following bytes: 08 09 0a (4 to the left from << and then 3 bytes
taken). So you will get the following unpacked data:
01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0a 0b  08 09 0a€  0c 0d 0e

 Well,  now you should know everything about the most often  used
packing algorithm. And if you use it in an optimized way, like in
"Pack-Ice", you will get good Packing-Rates. The old "Bytekiller"
uses  the same algorithm,  but not as optimized which  makes  the
file a lot bigger and unpacking half as fast.

ˆHuffmann€

 Now  I have introduced you to two packing routines and will  now
show  you  a  third method.  It might be the  best  known  -  the
Huffmann Packer.
 As  the Huffmann Packer is quite slow for unpacking,  it is  not
often used, except for some archive programs like "lzh" or "arc".
 Right  now I don't feel like explaining in detail how it  works,
otherwise I won't finish this article in time and it won't be  in
ST NEWS€ at all. I am already late with writing it. But if you are
interested  in  the  Huffmann  Packer,  you  will  find  lots  of
documentation in your local library.
 The Huffmann Packer expects that the bytes in a file appear with
a different frequency.  Most times the bytes $00,  $ff,  $01, $02
are more likely to come up than $be or $97.  For that reason, you
can shorten the 8 bits of the most frequent bytes to - say 6 bits
(to  save 2 bits whenever this byte appears) and  enlargen  other
rare bytes' 8 bit to 10 or more bits.  If you do this in the best
possible way,  you will save a lot of bytes all in all.  To  pack
with Huffmann,  you will need to create a tree and sort the bytes
for the most often and least often appearing bytes. If every byte
appears  the  same times as the others,  you will  not  save  any
bytes.  In  fact  you will lose some,  because for  the  Huffmann
packer  you need a table in front of the packed data  that  tells
the unpacker how many bits every byte takes.

ˆDynamic Huffmann Packer€

 If  you  still  improve your Huffmann Packer,  you  will  get  a
Dynamic  Huffmann Packer.  It is better because it  modifies  its
table  while  unpacking.  Imagine  you have a lot of  00  in  the
beginning of the file and a lot of ff bytes in the end.  In  this
case it will be useful to change your table during unpacking.

ˆShannon-Fano Compression€

 Shannon-Fano  Compression  is another algorithm to  reduce  your
amount  of  bytes.  Like Huffmann,  the SF Packer is  a  variable
length packer.  That means that you operate with bits,  not  with
bytes.  To explain how it works, imagine you have a text. Like in
Huffmann,  you  count  how often each character appears  in  this
text.  Then,  arrange your character set in the right order based
upon the probability of occurrence.  After that is done,  the set
must be divided into two equal or almost equal subsets based upon
the  probability of occurrence of the characters in each  subset.
The  first  digit in one subset is assigned a %0  and  the  first
digit  in  the  second subset is %1.  Now keep  on  dividing  the
subsets until each character has its own binary number.
 Compared  to the Huffmann Packer,  you will get similar  packing
rates, so use the one you like best.

ˆOthers€

 There are still some other Packing Algorithms, that are good for
special uses,  like compression of text,  pictures, digital sound
etc.

 To pack text, you can sometimes use the 8th bit that is not used
by ASCII.  Or you can use a dictionary packer,  in which the text
is  analysed and every known word,  like "and" or  "computer"  is
replaced  by a number.  This is a special use and requires a  big
dictionary.  You can also replace spaces by tabs (good for source
codes). There are many ways to save some bytes for texts.

 Pictures  can  be  reorganized.  Low res screens  consist  of  4
planes.  One  pixel is saved in 4 bits,  that are in 4  different
words in a sequence.  If you put the 4 bits in 1 word,  repeating
pixels  can  be packed.  You need different routines  for  medium
res screens.  You don't need to do any changes for hires screens,
because there is only one plane.  Another way to pack pictures is
to  use the fact that repeating pixels are often to be  found  in
vertical lines.

 Digital Sound is not easy to be packed,  but it can be done with
relative packing. That means, you always calculate the difference
from every byte to the preceeding byte.  Those differences repeat
more often than the other bytes.
 Animations  are also packed with relative packing.  That  means,
you just save the difference to the old picture. This saves a lot
of data. Remember this when you digitize your next porno show...

ˆPackers - a short summary of the most popular ones€

 Now  I  have shown you the most common packing  routines  and  I
think  that  your  brain is burning now.  So let  us  change  the
subject  to some easier-to-read subject.  I will  introduce  some
different packers:

 The  first packer I have seen on the ST was the  "Happy-Packer".
It  was  named  Happy Packer because at that time  there  was  an
article  about  packing algorithms in a  German  magazine  called
"Happy  Computer".   That was maybe 4 years ago and as  you  know
this packer was not very good in size and speed of  unpacking.  A
60 kB program was unpacked in about 10 seconds.
 The  "Happy  Packer" is a two-pass packer.  It  first  does  run
length encoding and then uses the Huffmann Packer.  In  fact,  it
works exactly as explained in the magazine.

 Another  packer  that was made was an improved  "Happy  Packer".
This  was  done by -me- of The Exceptions.  He added a  pass  and
reduced the size of the packed programs.  This packer was used in
the legendary "Union Demo".

 The  next  packer  was the  "Jek-Packer"  ("Bytekiller"  on  the
Amiga). It had best results compared to other packers and I often
used it to pack some data.  Until I suddenly found out that there
were bugs in the unpacked data.  The unpacked data was  different
than  the  original  data.  I changed the program  a  little  and
inserted a verify routine, that simply checks if packing was done
correctly  and I was stunned to see how often there were  errors.
The  reasons was that the data was unpacked to the  same  address
were  the  packed data was.  This is a nice thing,  but  has  the
effect that packed data is sometimes overwritten by the  unpacked
data.  This causes some fatal errors.  There were some other bugs
in the packer and an improved version coming from Ilja/Level  16,
STC/Brainpower,  -me-/Tex and Axe/Delight (note:  now  Superior!)
was finished more than one year ago (February 1990). I named this
packer "Delight Packer".
 Oh  yes,  the "Jek Packer" only uses string packing,  and it  is
also one of the packers that unpack all data from  behind.  There
is not much advantage in this method,  except that the files  can
be packed from the front, starting with the first byte and ending
with the last.  The "Bytekiller" uses d5 for a checksum and after
unpacking a byte tells if the file was damaged on the disk.

 The  "Automation Packer" was well known,  but there were also  a
lot of bugs in there.  The packer didn't work on hard drives  and
the like. In fact, it was some bad programming and I am sure that
the  packing routine was also ported from the Amiga.  It was  the
only  intelligent part of the program,  even though it  was  also
full of bugs.  Now,  the "Automation Packer" has a nice shell and
has been improved a lot.  I don't know if the packing routine has
also been improved or not. I never use it anyway.

 The "Pompey Pirates Packer" is one of the better packers around.
It can compress strings,  repeating bytes and replace bytes  with
only  1 bit set (1,2,4,8,..) by less than 8 bits.  This is  quite
useful,  as those bytes come up very often in files.  Some things
could be better though:  The string packer is not very optimized,
the  offset  could be set higher for better  compression  (up  to
$10000)  and packing takes very long (Hi JPM!  Are  these  enough
improvement suggestions?).
 Note:  I am referring to the "Pompey Pirates Packer" 1.5,  as  I
don't have 1.9 yet. Well, it might be improved. I don't know.

ˆA valuable lesson€

 By doing a lot of packing stuff,  I have learned that it is very
useful  to have a verify option in a packer,  because  there  are
often bugs hidden in the packer,  even if you think that you have
eliminated all.  And nothing is worse than creating damaged files
when packing. So I suggest all packer writers to include verify.

 Another thing that is interesting for all lamers:  Please  learn
to  remove  this horrible color flashing in  the  background.  It
hurts my eyes,  it makes good graphics look like shit and uses up
memory and processor time.  Especially those guys who use  "Pack-
Ice"  and  insert  their color flashing  shit  in  the  unpacking
routine should be hot into space where they can do as much  color
flashing as they want to.  Why do I optimize an unpack routine as
much  as  possible  if some lamer just adds 20  bytes  for  color
flashing.
 If  you want to demonstrate that a program is packed,  then  say
"Packed by...". That should do it.

 I have often been asked when "Pack-Ice" 3.0 will be finished....
 Well,  to be honest, I haven't done any coding on "Pack-Ice" for
2  or  3 months.  But right now I have the time to  get  back  to
coding.  Maybe you will not get 3.0,  but only 2.5 or  something,
but  I'll try to give you the best packer in your hands,  so  you
and everybody else can save a lot of disk-space.

---------------------------------------------------------------------------
