                    Universal(tm) Item Selector
                  Application & Design Software
                           P.O. Box 803
                         Merlin, OR 97532
                                                Technical support: 
                                                      Chris Latham
                                                    (503) 476-0071
                                                   Noon to 5:00 PM
                                                      Pacific Time

                         Limited Warranty

     This warranty does not apply to the limited version of the 
Universal Item Selector which is distributed freely through public
domain software channels.

     Application & Design Software warrants to the original 
purchaser of this software product that it will be free from 
defects in materials and workmanship for a period of ninety (90) 
days from date of purchase. Application & Design Software agrees 
either to repair or replace, at its options, free of charge, any 
Application & Design Software product discovered to be defective 
within the warranty period upon receipt of the Application & 
Design Software product, postage paid, with proof of date of 
purchase.

     This warranty is not valid should Application & Design 
Software not receive the completed registration card included with 
the Universal. This warranty is not applicable to normal wear
and tear. This warranty shall not be applicable and shall be void 
if the defect in the Application & Design Software product has 
arisen through abuse, unreasonable use, mistreatment or neglect. 
This warranty is in lieu of all other express warranties and no 
other representative or claims of any nature shall be binding on 
or obligate Application & Design Software. Any implied warranties 
to this software product are limited to the ninety (90) day period 
described or consequential damage resulting from possession, use 
or malfunction of this Application & Design Software product. 
Application & Design Software assumes no liability for any problems 
that may arise from the use of this software.

                             General.

     The Universal is a replacement for the GEM item selector
that is used by the majority of GEM applications currently 
available. The Universal adds new features and fixes several
bugs of the original item selector.
     New features include COPY, MOVE, RENAME, DELETE, FORMAT, 
FOLDER, DISK STATUS, DIRECTORY PRINTOUT, LOCK AND UNLOCK FILES, 
HORIZONTAL SCROLLING, and IMMEDIATE CHOICE OF DRIVE. These 
features work with either individual files or folders. All 
functions are usable FROM WITHIN PROGRAMS that give access to the 
GEM item selector.
     A unique feature of the Universal is the WILDCARD OPTION.
This option allows you to search for files by matching various 
characters of the filename and performing some of the above 
functions globally on any files that match. The Wildcard operation 
is explained further under "Wildcard Options".
      Some application programmers have designed around the 
original item selector dialog box. In most cases these programs 
provide text just above the file selector dialog box. Because of 
the increased features of Universal, its dialog box is two lines
larger. For this reason the dialog box rides lower on the screen 
providing access to the "File status line" found in some 
application programs.

                          Installation.

     The term "Installed" refers to the fact that the program has 
been read into the memory of your computer. Universal is 
copied into the AUTO folder of your boot disk. When the computer 
boots, the Universal copyright notice will be presented and the 
computer will continue to boot as usual. After this, any program 
that uses the GEM item selector dialog box, will instead use the 
Universal. The programs you use will not know the difference.

To create an AUTO folder.

      The Universal program is istalled automatically on boot up 
from the AUTO folder. If an AUTO folder already exists, simply 
copy Universal into it. If you need to create an AUTO folder use 
the desktop to do so. Just click your mouse on "New Folder" under 
"File" and name it AUTO without an extension.

Click, Grab and Drag.

     Most of the new functions of Universal operate by dragging
a file name to a function button within the dialog box. You first 
highlight a file name by clicking on the file with the left mouse 
button. While holding down the button, Grab and Drag the 
file name to the function button within the dialog box and release. 
When you have done this properly, the function button will highlight 
itself and become inverted to show that it has been activated. 
Note that the Cancel button may be clicked on to cancel any 
operation except delete. The delete operation presents its own 
special caution before continuation of the delete.
     Any of the names in the directory window of Universal may be
dragged in this manner to perform one of the operations. You may 
scroll up and down to find the file of your choice, just as in a 
standard item selector. Your choice can include a folder or a 
file. A special operation dealing with wildcards is also possibLe. 
See the "Wildcard Options" later in this manual.

                       SPECIFIC OPERATIONS

RENAME or FOLDER

     When choosing RENAME or FOLDER, the "Selection:" line that 
normally appears in the dialog box will change to "New Name:" for a 
rename operation and to "Folder Name:" when you are creating a new 
folder. When this occurs, you MUST input the name of your choice 
on the selection line, then click on the OK button, or click on 
the Cancel button to cancel the operation.

Destinations and Pathnames in general (Move and Copy)

     When performing a COPY operation, the destination drive 
is selected AFTER you have used CLICK, GRAB & DRAG, and the 
COPY function button has been activated. Before you choose OK, the 
"Directory:" line of the dialog box will change to "Destination:" to 
show that Universal is waiting for you to choose the destination
drive. You choose the drive by clicking on the Vertical Drive Bar 
and activating the drive letter you want the file to copy to. You 
then click on the OK button to complete the copy of the file or 
folder.
     To select the destination, all of the normal path selection 
methods are available. You may click on a new drive, and open or 
close any folder necessary. When the destination drive or folder's 
contents are showing in the file window, then OK may be pressed. 
At this point, the operation will be performed. The operation may 
be cancelled using the cancel button anytime before the last 
OK.
ALLOWABLE DESTINATIONS
     Files may be copied or moved anywhere, even to the same 
folder they originated from. In this case, however, a dialog 
showing the name conflict will be presented, allowing the new 
filename to be changed. The name conflict dialog contains three 
buttons, Stop, OK and Cancel. Clicking on stop will stop the 
entire copy operation, if more than one file was to be copied. 
Click on OK to continue the copy after the name has been changed. 
Cancel will cancel ONLY this one copy. If more than one file was 
to be copied, additional name conflicts will be separately 
presented. SPECIAL NOTE: Copying a file to the same folder that it 
comes from without changing the name CAN CAUSE THE FILE TO BE 
LOST.
     Copying a folder to its current path can be disastrous, and 
should not be attempted. Copying a folder to a subfolder of itself 
is also not allowed, and Universal tries to stop such attempts. The
reason that folders may not be copied or moved to within 
themselves is because a folder, in its entirety, cannot exist 
within itself; this would be like trying to put the apple pie back 
into the apple skin it came from.

RENAME (File).

     The RENAME function of Universal allows a new name to be
given to a file. For instance, a file named "ABC.DOC" can  be 
RENAMEd "XYZ.DOC". You use the same method of CLICK, GRAB and DRAG 
of the present file name to the RENAME button. When that button 
inverts you may then go to the "Selection" line and rename your 
file. Then click on OK and your file will be renamed and returned 
to the disk with the new name.

RENAME (Folders)

     During the RENAME operation of Universal as it relates to
folders, a renaming function is really not occurring. What is 
occurring is the creation of a new folder with the new name, and 
the move of all the files from the old folder name into the new 
one. This movement of contents includes subfolders as well. 
Universal then automatically deletes the old empty folder and
sub folders. 
     Be patient during a RENAME (Folder) function, as it does take 
some time. The time taken is far less than doing it manually.
     CLICK, GRAB and DRAG the folder name from the window of the 
Universal and pull it over the RENAME button and release the
mouse button. The RENAME button should now invert. Type in the new 
name of the folder and then click on OK. The new folder name will 
appear in the window of the Universal when the operation is
completed.

MOVE in General

     One of the most handy functions of TOS, but one which is 
unavailable from the GEM Desktop, is the ability to move a file 
anywhere on the disk it resides on. This means a file may be moved 
from one folder to another without performing a copy. The actual 
file contents are not changed, just the file or folder location 
where it can be found.
     Associated with every file on the disk is a "descriptor" which 
contains the file's name, length, date and time of creation, file 
type, and the location of the start of the file on the disk. It is 
this entry which may be moved from any folder on the drive 
to any other folder. This function is much faster to perform than 
to copy a file to a new folder on the drive, then delete the 
original. 

MOVE (Files)

     You may move a file from its current drive or folder to any 
other drive or folder. CLICK, GRAB and DRAG the filename over the 
MOVE button, then release. The MOVE button will become inverted. 
Now select the destination for the MOVE operation. This may be 
into a different folder on the same drive or another drive 
altogether. (Note: if you MOVE a file into a different folder on 
the SAME drive, the operation will take place very quickly.)
 
For instance, a file may be MOVEd thus:
  old name..."A:\FOLDER1\FOLDER2\ABC.DOC"  
  new name..."A:\FOLDER3\ABC.DOC"

     In the example above, the file name is unchanged, but we 
have given it a new path, so the file has been `moved' to a new 
folder, without an intervening copy/delete required.

MOVE (Folders)

     Moving a folder from one disk to another is similar to the 
above function. You CLICK, GRAB and DRAG the folder name from the 
Universal window to the MOVE button. When it inverts, you select a
destination as either another folder from the same drive or 
another drive, and then click on OK. The folder will be moved to 
either location you have requested. The old name will be used for 
the new name in the new location. In a MOVE (Folders) operation, 
all files and subfolders are moved. After the movement of all 
files is complete, the original, now empty folder on the source 
disk is deleted.

COPY (Files)

     The COPY function of Universal is quite similar to the copy
function of the desktop. You use the CLICK, GRAB & DRAG method 
to bring the file name to the COPY button within the 
dialog box and then release the mouse button. The COPY button will 
then invert to let you know the information has been captured. 
Next select the drive destination using the Vertical Drive 
Selector (VDS), and click on OK. The "Destination" of your copy 
will be shown above the file window. 
      If you are copying this file to a folder at the new 
destination, you must first open up the folder you desire in the 
window of your destination and then click on OK.
     NOTE: With ST Desktop copying, the copied file redates itself 
to the time it was copied, replacing the files original time and 
date of creation. In Universal, the original time and date of
file creation is carried fully through to the new copy thereby 
eliminating new dating of the file.

COPY (Folders)

     The COPY (Folders) function of Universal is similar to the
copy function described above. You use the CLICK, GRAB & DRAG 
method to bring the folder name to the COPY button within the 
dialog box, then release. Next select the drive destination using 
the Vertical Drive Selector (VDS), and click on OK. The 
"Destination" of your copy will be shown above the file window.

Horizontal Scrolling.

     The Universal has another nice feature for determining file
size. The bottom of the file window has a slider similar to that 
used on most GEM top operations. Using this slider, you can check 
on the status of a file by scrolling to the right in the window.

(VDS) Vertical Drive Selector

     Universal provides an easy method of changing the drive
from which a directory will be displayed. Simply click on the 
desired drive button in the VERTICAL DRIVE BAR on the right side 
of the Universal. The line under "Directory" will then change to
show the new drive as the source for the directory.
     Drives A through G are shown in the drive bar. Active drives 
are show in dark letters, inactive drives are shown in light 
printing. If you have more drives, you can scroll through all 26 
drive letters, A through Z (although only A through P are fully 
supported by most applications). 

FOLDER. Creating a new folder

     To create a new folder, click on the drive where the folder 
is to reside. Click on the FOLDER button at the top of the screen. 
The "Selection" line will change to "Folder Name". Enter the name 
of the new folder, then click on OK or press return (or you may 
cancel by clicking on Cancel). The new folder will be created in 
the currently shown directory.

FORMAT. Formatting disks

     To format a disk, you must be currently on drive A or B. If 
this is the case, the FORMAT button will become enabled and you 
may click on it. When you do, a new dialog box appears. You may 
choose single or double sided formatting, choose the number of 
sectors per track (9 is normal) and choose the number of tracks 
(80 is normal) and you may choose the new TWISTER format (just 
click YES or NO) that provides speedier disk drive access (note: 
the TWISTER option is ONLY available if you have the new BLITTER 
roms installed in your system). You may also enter a disk label if 
you desire. After these options are all set, click on FORMAT to 
start the formatting process or EXIT if you wish to cancel. The 
status bar at the bottom will show you formatting progress. Upon 
completion, a dialog will appear showing the number of bytes 
available for use.

(?) DISK STATUS

     The question mark in the upper right corner of the file 
window is used to find out information about the current drive. 
When you click on this question mark (?) a dialog will appear 
showing you information on number of files, bytes used, and number 
of folders. When doing a status of a folder, note that all 
subfolders of that folder are included in the count.

(P) Printing a directory on the printer

     A printout of the folder that is currently displayed in the 
directory window is possible with the "P" command. The "P" in the 
lower left corner of the file window may be clicked to get a 
printed listing of the current directory. The printer must be on 
line and not busy for the function to work. All folders will be 
shown in the printout but only the files that are currently in 
the directory window will be printed. (Note: if the printer is on 
line and ready to print, the directory printing will immediately 
start, with no chance to cancel).

LOCK and UNLOCK.

     A safeguard for your important files is also included with 
the Universal. The LOCK and UNLOCK features work the same as the
others. You CLICK, GRAB and DRAG a file name over the top of the 
"Check Mark" on the lower right corner of the dialog box. A new 
dialog box will appear where you may select to have the file 
"Read/Write" or "Read-Only". Make your selection and click on OK. 
If the file was made "Read-Only", the file will then appear in the 
directory window with a check mark to the left of the file name. 
That file can not be written to or deleted, nor may it be moved, 
else an error will result (note: trying to move or delete a folder 
that contains a locked file will also result in an error). To 
UNLOCK the file repeat the procedure by CLICK, GRAB and DRAGing 
the locked file over the "Check Mark" and selecting "Read/Write" in 
the dialog box when it appears.

                     SPECIAL SEARCH FEATURES

Using Wildcards

     Wildcard filenames are fully supported by Universal. Any of
the four file functions (MOVE, COPY, DELETE and LOCK/UNLOCK) can 
be made to work on a group of files by setting up a wildcard 
search criteria. The wildcard characters * and ? are used to make 
such matches.

Types of Wildcards

     ASTERISK(*), for those not familiar with Wildcards, 
substitutes for all possible letters of an unknown word. A 
document file name example would be "*.DOC" (don't enter the 
quotes). You could use this Wildcard ASTERISK to designate all 
your document files on your current disk to be implemented in a 
MOVE, COPY, DELETE or LOCK/UNLOCK. You can see how useful this 
would be. If you wanted to DELETE all your backup files on a 
document disk to make room for more files, all you would do is 
type "*.BAK" (don't enter the quotes) on  the "Selection" line of 
the Universal and then CLICK, GRAB and DRAG that entry to the
DELETE button, and all you backup files on that disk would be 
DELETEd.
      The same procedure would be possible with MOVE, COPY 
or LOCK/UNLOCK.

     QUESTION MARK(?) substitutes for single letters that are 
unknown. For instance, if you had a series of files titled by a 
date prefix you could use the "?" to substitute for unknown dates. 
As in a file like "87_Mar.DOC", where the 87 refers to the year 
and the Mar refers to the month, a wildcard like "87_???.DOC would 
call up all the files for 87 with a 3 letter month designation and 
you could then DELETE, MOVE, COPY or LOCK/UNLOCK them. Yes you are 
right, you could also again use the Asterisk(*) in place of the 
three question marks and obtain the same results except that using 
the Asterisk(*) you would also get files such as "87_FOUR.DOC" 
because the Asterisk assumes the full 8 character file name..
     Note that wildcards do not apply to subfolders, but only to 
files within the folder currently shown in the directory window of 
Universal.
     
RENAME files with Wildcard

     This is a special function of Universal and will not
normally be found in any operating system. This RENAME function 
allows you to change the extension of files to a new one. For 
instance, the .ACC extension of accessories may be changed to .ACX 
if you don't want them to be loaded on powerup.
     To use this function, enter an asterisk (*) for the 8 
character filename. For the extension, enter the extension of the 
files you wish to change. Drag the entered Wildcard name to the 
RENAME button. The "Selection" line will change to "New Name". 
Enter the new extension, leaving the asterisk in the 8 character 
part of the filename. Click on OK or press return and the files 
will be renamed.

Error messages

     Depending on the type of error that occurs in the Universal,
you may get one of several different alert boxes. Some of these 
are automatically generated by the operating system (like the 
familiar "Drive A: is not responding..." alert that is 
received when trying to read an unformatted disk), and three are 
generated by the Universal itself. These three error boxes report 
the following errors:

PATHNAME NOT FOUND. Somehow you have a pathname you are trying to 
copy to that doesn't exist.

ILLEGAL ACCESS. This is a TOS catchall for several different error 
types. You will generally get this error when trying to delete or 
move a file that is locked, or delete or move a folder containing 
a locked file. 

DISK FULL ERROR. You tried to copy a file (or move a file) to 
a disk that is out of room.

Using the ACCESSORY to call Universal

     Included on the disk is an accessory called "CALLFSEL.ACC". 
This accessory is included to give easy access to the Universal
and its many functions. There are many GEM applications available 
that do not use the GEM item selector and therefore you would not 
have access to the added functions of the Universal. If you have
CALLFSEL.ACC installed, and the application gives access to the 
accessories, you could still then access Universal to perform
its functions.
     To use CALLFSEL.ACC, just install it on your boot disk along 
with your other accessories. It will appear in the "Desk" menu 
under the title "File Selector". When called, the file selector 
will appear and you may perform any needed function. When you are 
done, you may click on either the OK or Cancel button in 
Universal to return to your application.

The BUG report

     As of this writing, the Universal has been tested with a 
great many different programs. Every care was taken in creating 
the Universal to make sure that it conformed with standard GEM 
procedures and did not violate the operating system.
     Following is a list of known programs that have been found to 
be incompatable with Universal in one way or another. In these 
cases, caution should be exercised when using Universal. If you 
find additional circumstances where Universal is in conflict 
with other programs, please write to us and when we have initiated 
a fix, a FREE replacement copy will be sent to you.  This list 
reflects our testing of popular programs for the ST. 

Program name Company         Problem                             

Easel/ST Comp. Fenestrations Both the Universal and Easel/ST 
                             grab the AES vector in order to 
                             perform their functions. Although 
                             both programs work together, there is 
                             a problem when trying to run a TOS or 
                             a TTP program. To run a TOS or TTP 
                             program, one or the other of these 
                             two programs will need to be removed 
                             from the AUTO folder.

Universal is a product of Applications and Design Software,
Merlin, Oregon  and may be copied for owners personal use. Use by 
other than purchaser constitutes fraud and a violation of 
copyright laws. Additional copies of Universal may be purchased
by original purchasers at $10 per copy and these may be given to 
friends and other computer users. The imbedded program serial 
number will attest to the validity of the gift. When ordering 
additional copies, please supply your programs serial number. 





