     Å                 wow !!  this is gunstick's revolutionary
fullscreen-screen. nobody can beat Å !!! this
screen uses the Å-playfield technique. i hope
it will be the best fullscreen distorter ever made.
      the font is from oxar î (great work!).      the wonderful 
background was designed by dizzy from tool 8.      
all code and music sampling by gunstick.      i'm sorry
for all the people who don't like slow scrollers, but
this text is a bit longer, to show you, that nothing is
precalculated.       many of those shitty disting
one-plane scrolls are preshifted.      theese ones
are not!           if you still think this is easy then look at
the parallaxed (bidirectional !!!) background:[
                 |              ]Å[
                       || ||
                            ]have you
noticed that it's not simply parallaxed?    there's another
wave in it.         i don't want to make greetings here, so
let's continue talking about fullscreens and hardscrollers.
    i haven't seen any hardscroller which works always correctly
on all st's. so if you see some nasty flickering on the top
border you have an st model i wasn't able to test.     until
now i found 14 different hardware configurations. our hardscroller
works on all, but there might be more . . .       so if you are a
programmer, please test your overscan routine on every st you can
find (especially those in other countries !!)          message to griff: i
tried to use the keyboard processor for hardscrolling but it didn't work.
do you want to know how i manage to shift all the scrollings??? well
the dma chip can serialize data. by programming it in a special way
(reading and writing the same time)
the dma sends the data back, but shifted by one bit. little 3d graphics
hint: what about doing your 3d graphics with the midi interface?
       as you have now often enough seen the distortion wave and heard
the digisound i think it's time to press space and i will wrap here                          