MENU OPTIONS.

     Set Up:
          Set  Drive  - Allows the disk drive for saving and loading
          sample data to be altered between drive A - P 

          Set Midi Chan - Allows the midi channel to be changed.
          Ensure that it is set to the same    channel   as    the 
          sampler.

          Sample+param - Select to include parameters when  saving 
          or loading samples.

          Quit - Exits the program and returns to the desktop.

     File:
          Load  Sample - displays all the samples on  the  current 
          disk  and  loads  a selected  sample from  disk  to  the 
          sampler.

          Load Param - as above but loads sample parameters.  This 
          will  be  carried out automatically if  Sample+Param  is 
          selected under the SetUp menu.

          Load  Overall - as above but loads an overall data  file 
          containing  overall set up data which can not be  stored 
          on  'quick disks' i.e.  midi channel,omni  on/off, multi 
          program,master tune,pitchbend etc  

          Save  sample - prompts for a sample number  between  one 
          and sixteen (assuming sixteen voice extension is fitted) 
          then prompts for a name to use for the sample on disk 
          when saved.

          Save param - as above but saves sample parameters.
          Sample parameters are saved  automatically, with a sample 
          save if the 'sample+param' option is ticked under the 'Set 
          Up' menu.

          Save overall - saves overall setup data prompting for  a 
          name for the disk file. 

          Delete File - allows any file to be deleted from disk to 
          make more room. Use carefully !!!

          Show List - Shows all the files on the disk in  selected 
          drive plus the freespace left on the disk.


     Bulk:
          Load All - takes all sample,sample parameter and overall 
          data  files  (with the correct extensions) in  the  root 
          directory of the selected disk and sends them over midi.

          Load Selected - presents a file selector box from  which 
          files can be selected in the usual way.  When all of the 
          files have been selected click on cancel and you will be 
          prompted to send the list or cancel.

          Note:  Pressing  the escape key during a bulk load  will 
          abort the load as soon as any file that was being loaded 
          when the escape key was pressed is sent.




          
