
          NINE LIVES: CAST. COPYRIGHT (C) 1988 LEVEL 9
          --------------------------------------------

Victim and suspects.. 
 Sir Robert Farleigh (60): millionaire patriarch 
 William Farleigh: son (35). Black hair. Boring doctor in tweeds
 Kathy Farleigh (nee Pym): wife (31). Mousy hair. Short, fat, glasses 
 Anthony Farleigh: son (33). Black hair. Hooray Henry in DJ, monacle 
 Fiona Farleigh: daughter (30). Black hair.Horsey.Green anorak,boots
 Clifford Lodge: fiancee (45). Oily brown re patriarch 

Sir Robert arranges and enjoys the annual meetings of the Farleigh 
clan, where he can lord it over his offspring and remind them who's 
boss and who owns the money they hope to inherit. (He is the owner 
of a large engineering firm, but no longer handles the day-to-day 
running of the business). Sir Robert makes a point of changing his 
will each year. and is constantly referring to this.  

He is red-faced, loud and pompous; bellowing personal remarks across 
the room to the greatre patriarch 

Sir Robert arranges and enjoys the annual meetings of the Farleigh 
clan, where he can lord it over his offspring and remind them who's 
boss and who owns the money they hope to inherit. (He is the owner 
of a large engineering firm, but no longer handles the day-to-day 
running of the business). Sir Robert makes a point of changing his 
will each year. and is constantly referring to this.  

He is red-faced, loud and pompous; bellowing personal remarks across 
the room to the great embarrassment of the others. (Cf Bob Maxwell). 
He is also in poor health. 

Sir Robert is currently emotionally involved with Sue Lombard. 


* William Farleigh: son (35). Black hair. Boring doctor in tweeds

William Farleigh is the elsest son, but the opposite of his father. 
A grey, quiet man (cf Geoffrey Howe, but without his personality). 
He is a GP in a country backwater. 

Nevertheless, Sir Robert is a traditionalist and is quite likely 
to hand the bulk of his fortune onto William when he dies. 

William hates being called "Bill" and is suspicious of his wife Kathy 
who is surprisingly sexy (a triumph of mind over matter) and a flirt. 


* Kathy Farleigh (nee Pym): wife (31). Mousy hair. Short, fat, glasses 

Kathy is not pretty, but she acts pretty and knows how to attract men 
with wit and subtle flattery. She thinks herself a very intelligent 
woman who has married a very stupid man. She is bored stiff with the 
Country and is much attracted by Anthony Farleigh's cultivated manner.  

Kathy is newly pregnant and, though the father may be in question, 
the baby would presumably evantually grow up to inherit the business. 

Kathy and Fiona hated each other at first sight. (Cf Dawn French)


* Anthony Farleigh: son (33). Black hair. Hooray Henry in DJ, monacle 

Anthony is slim, dark, handsome, lazy and stony broke. While not 
actually a con-man, he makes a good living from those foolish enough 
to be his friends. But he promptly spends it all. 

Kathy amuses him, and he would not be averse to an affair with her; 
especially as William never spends money and is hence quite rich. 
(Cf hero in "Monacled Mutineer). 


* Fiona Farleigh: daughter (30). Black hair.Horsey.Green anorak,boots

Fiona is dominant and efficient (cf Princess Anne) and is the only 
one to go into the family business. She already has a seat on the 
board and is increasingly irritated at the way Sir Robert is letting 
the business drift. 


* Clifford Lodge: fiancee (45). Oily brown hair. 

Clifford is a senior manager in the business and has formed an 
alliance, both in business and bed, with Fiona. (Cf Cecil Parkinson). 

He has no sense of humour, but feels compelled to attempt jokes: 
just one of the features that endears him to nobody. But he has 
unbelievable persistence. 


* Jarvis Armstrong: gardener/butler (61). Balding.Stooped

Jarvis is normally the gardener, but changes to butler when guests 
are expected (and is in butler costume throughout the game). He 
takes his role seriously and attempts to imitate Jeeves. 

He is fiercely protective of Sir Robert and Fiona and the estate, 
and distrusts those like Sue who threaten it. 

Jarvis is married to Vera but they have not talked to each other for 
five years, communicating indirectly or speaking to the air, but not 
using the silly "Tell Vera that .." method. 


* Vera Armstrong: housekeeper (63). Grey hair. School-marm type

Vera has acted as cook/housekeeper for many years (there are rarely 
any gues Sir Robert's advisor 
and PA. They have ajoining rooms, but it will remain unclear whether 
they are sleeping together. (Cf Sue Lawley). 

Sue is in an awkward position, as were she to marry Sir Robert (say) 
it is reasonable to assume that she would inherit his wealth after 
his death and this is a threat to their vested interests. So she is 
keeping a low profile and trying to be polite to everyone. 

She will be glad to help with technical questions in the game. 


* Inspector Gormley: count Sir Robert's advisor 
and PA. They have ajoining rooms, but it will remain unclear whether 
they are sleeping together. (Cf Sue Lawley). 

Sue is in an awkward position, as were she to marry Sir Robert (say) 
it is reasonable to assume that she would inherit his wealth after 
his death and this is a threat to their vested interests. So she is 
keeping a low profile and trying to be polite to everyone. 

She will be glad to help with technical questions in the game. 


* Inspector Gormley: country policeman who arrives after the murder. 

Pompous middle-aged policeman who examines a few random things around 
the murder site and tells people not to move anything while he waits 
for the police. 

Ask him about things, or give them to him for his view about their 
value as evidence. And anything given to him is automatically 
registered as evidence. 
