
            Virtual screen XIMG viewer XIMGVIEW
                           and
              XIMG snapshot utility XIMGSNAP

                       1994, 1995

                          (C)

                     Eero Tamminen



XIMGVIEW

Viewer loads any IMG or XIMG picture and shows it. It's mainly intended
for monochrome, but it should 'work' on any resolution. On monochrome it
dithers color pictures. On color resolutions extra colors and bitplanes
are just cut away (color quantization would be a hard thing to debug on
a monochrome monitor that I have) so that images with more colors than
the resolution supports won't look good at all (for more than 16 color
pictures I recommend gif or jpeg encoded pictures as IMG format doesn't
pack very efficiently).

Program should be compatible as all screen access is done with AES or
VDI functions. I use no windows (therefore this program is on 'top' all
the time it runs) as programming them is a bore and adds 'unnecessary'
code ;-).


VIEWER USAGE

- Drop viewer icon onto the desktop (or install it for IMGs).
- Drag image files on the viewer's icon and/or click on an IMG file.
- If picture doesn't fit into screen, you can scroll it around by
  moving the mouse.
- By pressing a mouse button you'll get an alert box from which you
  can select either previous or next picture or quit.

You could also just run the program as is. It will then give you a
fileselector for selecting an IMG file to show.


XIMGSNAP

With the ximgsnap accessory you can save parts of the screen into a file
as a standard GEM raster image (IMG). When run, the program will ask you
which part of the screen you want to save: whole screen, top window
workarea or the area that you'll define with a rubberband. After that
the selected area is packed as a (X)IMG into a file. File will be saved
into the folder pointed by CLIPBRD or SCRAPDIR enviroment variables or
into C:\CLIPBRD, C:\ or A:\ (whatever will first meet the criteria)
as SNAP_???.IMG.

This program doesn't need any additional memory during the packing, so
it can be used also with the programs that grab all the remaining memory
at the startup. Snapshot 'should' work on all 2-256 color resolutions.
Maximum width for the saved area is 2000 pixels. Pictures are converted,
packed and saved one line at the time. Ximg-snapshot works both as an
acessory (might not be able to get the enviroment variables?) and an
application.


DEVELOPEMENT

These programs are programmed in Everest text-editor 3.3e and compiled
with Sozobon C v. 2.0X. Some debugging is done with GCC 2.5.8. I'm in
need of betatesters (please send me e-mail feedback!) and the
Compedium...


AIMS

Small program size and memory usage while still having a nice(?)
user interface. I like things to be functional without too much
frills :-).


TESTING ENVIROMENT

A STfm with 4MB ram, KaosTOS 1.4, a SM124 monochrome editor,
MH-MiNT v1.12-h3 and Thing 0.31d desktop.


THANKS

- To Gryf aka Thomas Binder (binder@rbg.informatik.th-darmstadt.de)
  for the IMG scanline packing code.

- To Warwick Allison for doing those wonderful GEM conforming games /
  game ports (NetHack, AmiGo...). I recommend checking Warwick's GEM++
  and AMS C++ libraries for GEM and game programming. I hope I would
  have seen these before I wrote these programs, as these contain a
  lot of interesting code...

- To Arno Weasel for the Thing desktop.


COPYRIGHT, DISCLAIMER AND DISTRIBUTION

Ximgview.prg and ximgsnap.acc are copyright of Eero Tamminen. XIMG
scanline packing in snapshot.c is copyright of Thomas Binder.

These programs come with NO WARRANTY. Author cannot be held responsible
for any damage done by proper or improper use of these programs.

These programs are freeware and can be distributed on condition that all
the files ximgview.prg, ximgview.c, makeview.mak, ximgsnap.prg,
ximgsnap.c, makesnap.mak and img.txt (this text) are included unchanged
and there's *no* charge taken. Contact Eero Tamminen if you want to
include any of these files with another program or onto a coverdisk.

You may include parts of the code in other freeware programs providing
that your program documentation credits my and Thomas' efforts.


        Eero Tamminen
        t150315@cc.tut.fi
        puujalka@modeemi.cs.tut.fi

        23600 Kalanti
        Finland


	Thomas Binder
	binder@rbg.informatik.th-darmstadt.de

	Johann-Valentin-May-Straže 7
	64665 Alsbach-H„hnlein
	Germany


CHANGES

05.09.1994, Viewer v1.0.

12.09.1994, Viewer v1.1. Added dialogs for showing what viewer does.

14.09.1994, 30% speed up in dithering.

10.11.1994, Viewer v1.2. Added color changing, screen redraw after
showing an image and removed my own interleave routine from the viewer.

13.11.1994, Viewer color resolution picture conversion routine now does
conversion a line by line, thus needing upto 30% less memory than
before.

05.12.1994, Removed help from the viewer and added fileselector for use
with the old desktops.

28.11.1994, Snapshot v0.8.

03.11.1994, Snapshot v1.0. Included Gryf's img scanline packing code.

05.12.1994, Removed fileselector from the snapshot as most fileselectors
don't clean up the screen and doing the redraw myself (would need a
screen sized backup buffer) or using events to give main application(s)
time to do the redraw) would be impractical.

18.3.1995, Viewer 1.3 & snapshot 1.1. Added a color palette order
conversion (palette saved before in VDI order, which doesn't correlate
with h/w color order (A real bummer I say)). Snapshot will now save
images to CLIPBOARD folder if possible. Viewer has now an alert box
for image info and for loading the previous / next picture.

6.5.1995, snapshot 1.12. Fixed a bug in the saving path code and
applied Thomas' patches to the source (eg. MagiC work-around).

