        Yeaah, you finally found it !!! Wasn't it fun 
looking so often at the same screen ???  You are probably now very 
happy to see all these sprites after your very long quest for the 
screen which is difficult to enter...  Ok, now that everybody is 
here, I can tell you that this is another fullscreen by me, The 
Fate...    all graphix were done by tyrem of the respectables... 
  the music is from Mad Max of Tex...    It's one of my oldest 
screens, but i think it's still very good. it was coded after the 
party in marseilles when I and gunstick stayed some more days at 
fury's home to help him cleaning up his house before his mother was 
coming back.    yeah, this evening i will leave luxembourg to go to 
the st news international christmas coding conference in holland 
where we will have a great time. As the invitation says, it will be 
the hottest thing since the summer and I think this is true and 
everybody who won't be there will surely miss something... Anyway, 
I'm looking forward to meet The lost boys again... I met them the 
first time this year at Thalion where they finished their very brill 
life's a bitch demo which is surely one of the best demos ever... 
   i will now have to stop writing very soon, as i still have no 
dutch money, i have to backup my harddisk, i have to put my clothes 
in my bag, i have to take a bath, i have to put this scrolltext in 
the screen, i have to put my computers and monitors in some boxes and 
i have to do some other things which aren't that important, so i 
don't mention them.... You surely wonder why i tell you all this 
crap... I don't know. Probably because i have no other ideas and 
because i do not want this scroll to be very short...  did you 
already know, that it is possible to write scrolltexts after you have 
eaten something... if not, you are probably completely mad and that's 
also why you still read this shit...      are you still there ??? 
    i am still here !!!     there is a hidden music in this screen 
!!!   you have to enter   I    then    -    then    a    then    m 
   then    -    then    m    then    a    then    d    then    !!! 
   and all this three times and do not pause too long between pushing 
the keys...    if nothing happens, it's not my fault...       anyway 
it was just a joke which works only with people who are mad !!! or do 
you type in i-am-mad!!! and this three times when you aren't mad ???? 
     well, now the scrolling is long enough, anyway i'm really out of 
ideas and so the only thing i can do is to let this scroll begin from 
the beginning.......              
