                        The Popup Menu Editor
                        ---------------------
     The  editor  allows you to edit several popup  menus  with  ease,
using a simple menu driven operation.


Getting started
---------------
     The  first thing that you should do is install the  editor,  this
tells  the  editor that amount of memory to reserve for  you  to  work
with.  Double  click on INSTALL.PRG to load the installation  program.
This reads EDMENU.INF,  and displays the results in a dialog box.  You
should  edit  the three items to values that suit you.  Click  on  the
'Calc' button to calculate how much memory will be required (in bytes)
by your current selections. The meanings of the three numbers are...

Max menus:     You may edit more than one menu in each file,  this  is
               the maximum number that you may edit.
Item memory:   This is the number of bytes allocated for storing  menu
               item definitions. About 20K should be sufficient.
String memory: This  is  the  number of bytes  allocated  for  storing
               strings,  such as item names,  help strings etc.  About
               20K should sufficient.

When  you have made your mind up,  click on "Install" to save the  new
EDMENU.INF file, or "Cancel" to quit without saving.


Running the editor
------------------
     To  run  the  editor,  double-click  on  EDMENU.PRG.  The  editor
requires the file EDMENU.INF,  and one of the three supplied  resource
files, which one depends on the current screen resolution.

     When loaded, you will get a blank screen with a menu bar. You may
now immediately start editing a new file, or load a file from disk for
editing.  If you are a first time user,  it would be sensible to  load
the file DEMO.POP from the DEMO folder.  Tinkering with this will give
you a good idea of how to use the editor.

Adding menus
------------
     To add or amend a popup menu definition, select the "Select menu"
option.  To  add a new menu,  enter its name and click on  "Add".  The
other options are fairly obvious in their operation.  To edit a  menu,
click on its name and then on the "Edit" button.

Editing a menu
--------------
     If you are editing a new menu,  a dummy item will be inserted for
you  to start on.  The first thing you will want to do is change  this
entry  to something of your choice.  To do this,  select  the  "Amend"
option  from  the  "Options" menu.  A dialog will  appear  with  three
editable parts.  The "help" and "name" strings are optional and may be
left blank if not required.  The "name" string is where you enter  the
'C' #define name of the menu item. References to this item within your
program then use this name.
     The "Add before" and "Add after" insert items before or after the
cursor position,  using the same dialog as the "Amend" option. You may
not add an item before the first item in a menu or sub-menu.
     To add a new sub-menu,  select the "Add submenu" option and  fill
in the dialog as above.
     To delete an item,  select the "Delete item" option.  You may not
delete the first item in the menu,  or any item that still has a  sub-
menu attached.
     To add/change/delete the 'C' #define name of an item,  select the
"Name item" option.

     To  move the cursor around the menu items,  use the cursor  arrow
keys.  Up  and Down move the cursor to previous/next item.  The  right
cursor  moves into a sub-menu,  If one exists.  The left cursor  moves
back out of a sub-menu.

Item attributes
---------------
     Each item in the menu may be one or more of the following...

Selectable:    The  item will highlight when the mouse  cursor  passes
               over it. It will return it's index number when clicked.
Disabled:      These  appear grey in the menu and may not be  selected
               by  the  user.  To display a greyed line in  the  menu,
               enter it's text as "#l",  and disable it.  This will be
               displayed as a greyed line by the main popup module.
Checked:       A tick is displayed to the left of the item.
Centre:        The text is centred within the bounding vertical  lines
               of the menu.


Saving/Loading
--------------
     The menu definitions are saved in ".POP" files.  These files  are
in a special format unique to the editor.  It is these files that  you
load and save into the editor.

Source code
-----------
     In order to use the menus within your own programs,  you must use
the "Source" option.  This saves a header file (".H").  This file must
be #include'ed into your source code.

General stuff
-------------
     The  instructions  above  should be fairly  un-necessary  as  the
editor is very simple to use. There are, however, some things that you
should know:

1.   Don't use desk accessories that open their own windows. They will
     corrupt the screen area where your popup menus are being edited.

2.   You will need at least 32K of free memory.  The editor needs this
     amount of memory for storing screen data.

2.   Help  strings will not be displayed in low resolution,  there  is
     not enough room on the screen !

3.   If  you are creating a set of menus to be used as  a  replacement
     for GEM's top menu bar,  then you should create one menu for each
     drop-down. See the demonstration for details.


Copyright
---------
     The editor is a part of the "Popup" package,  and is governed  by
the shareware rules set out in the main "readme" file

