FORTH-83
This is apparently a full spec version of Forth to the FORTH-83  standard. 
Probably  the best advice I can give is to tell you that the word  'words' 
will  print all the words in the current vocabulary on the screen and  the 
word  'vocs'  will print the names of all  the  vocabularies.  After  that 
you're pretty much on your own even if you know a little Forth already.

 Various words are given to access discs etc. The word 'fload' followed by 
a  filename  (or path name for a file) will load the file as  if  it  were 
being  typed at the keyboard.  If you're familiar with either CPM or  UNIX 
you shouldn't find much difficulty getting directory listings, deleting or 
renaming files etc.  For instance if you want a directory listing then the 
words  'ls',  'dir',  'files'  all do what you might expect  them  to  do. 
Changing directory is done using 'cd', etc. The directory name '..' refers 
to the directory above and a '\' at the beginning of a pathname means  the 
root directory.

 The word 'see' can be used to examine the definition of a word.  It  will 
cope with variables,  constants,  vocabularies as well as executable words 
and  can cope with both Forth definitions and assembler definitions  equal 
well  (though the assembler will of course be in reverse!).  Use  of  this 
word  is  strongly recommended if you want to find out how to  open  files 
from within forth definitions etc.

 The word 'dump' can be used to examine blocks of memory.  Simply push the 
start address and the end address on the stack and use  'dump'.  Similarly 
there  is a disassembler which can be used to examine code in  memory  and 
there  is  an  assembler so you can write assembly language  in  your  new 
definitions.

  Note  that though there appears to be all the words  in  the  dictionary 
required for implementing an editor the 'emacs' word is not our old friend 
as  some might expect.  Rather it appears to try loading an  emacs  editor 
from disc. If you have emacs try it!

 There is one bug in Forth which is annoying to say the least. The words ' 
(tick)  and  ['] are defined using the character ' (ascii  39)  but  under 
Forth  the keyboard is set up to produce the character ｺ when the  key  to 
the left of return is pressed. This leaves no way of using the words ' and 
[']  from  the keyboard though they may be used in  files.  It  should  be 
possible  to  alter  the keyboard mappings so  the  correct  character  is 
generated  by  the  tick key though I haven't  tried  it  yet.  Presumably 
whoever  set up the keyboard tables decided to have the ticks produced  as 
they  appear on the keys not realising that the word definitions used  the 
'real' ascii tick!
